MOLECULAR PAIN
A simplified up-down method (SUDO) for
measuring mechanical nociception in rodents
using von Frey filaments
et al.
Bonin
Boninetal.MolecularPain2014,10:26
http://www.molecularpain.com/content/10/1/26
Boninetal.MolecularPain2014,10:26
http://www.molecularpain.com/content/10/1/26 MOLECULAR PAIN
METHODOLOGY Open Access
A simplified up-down method (SUDO) for
measuring mechanical nociception in rodents
using von Frey filaments
Robert P Bonin1, Cyril Bories1 and Yves De Koninck1,2*
Abstract
Background: The measurement of mechanosensitivity is a key method for thestudy of pain in animal models. This
is often accomplishedwith the use ofvon Frey filamentsin anup-down testing paradigm. The up-down method
described byChaplan et al. (JNeurosci Methods 53:55–63, 1994) for mechanosensitivity testing in rodents remains
one ofthemost widely used methods for measuring pain inanimals. However, this method results inanimals
receiving a varying number of stimuli, which may lead to animals in different groups receiving different testing
experiences that influencestheir later responses. To standardize themeasurement of mechanosensitivity we
developed a simplified up-down method (SUDO)for estimatingpaw withdrawal threshold (PWT) withvon Frey
filaments that uses a constant numberof five stimuli per test. We further refinedthe PWTcalculation to allow the
estimation of PWTdirectly from thebehavioral response to the fifth stimulus, omitting theneed for look-up tables.
Results: The PWT estimates derivedusing SUDOstrongly correlated (r>0.96) with thePWT estimatesdetermined
withtheconventional up-down method of Chaplan etal., and this correlation remained very strong across different
levels oftesterexperience, different experimental conditions, and intests from both mice and rats. The two testing
methods alsoproduced similarPWT estimates in prospective behavioral tests of mice atbaselineand after
induction ofhyperalgesia by intraplantar capsaicin or complete Freund’sadjuvant.
Conclusion: SUDO thus offersan accurate, fastand user-friendly replacement forthe widely used up-down method
ofChaplan et al.
Keywords: Mechanosensitivity,Pain measurement,Rodents, Allodynia, Nociception
Background commonly used. Indeed, a survey of recent studies indi-
Anexaggerated nocifensiveresponseto mechanical stimuli cated that approximately 60% of publications where PWT
is considered a key indicator of abnormal sensory process- was measured used thisIn the up-down method up-down
ing in most rodent models of pathological pain [1,2]. methodoramodifiedversionofit[6].
Mechanosensitivity can be determined as the threshold In up-down methods of testing, a lack of response to a
amount of force required to elicit a behavioral response, filamentdictatesthatthenexthigherfilamentisusedinthe
such asthe withdrawal ofapaw from the applied stimulus followingstimulation,whileapositiveresponsedictatesthe
[3,4].Therearedifferentmethodsavailabletoestimatepaw useofthenextlowerfilament.Intheup-downmethodde-
withdrawal threshold (PWT) with the use of von Frey fila- scribed by Chaplan et al. [3], the number of von Frey pre-
ments,buttheup-downmethodofDixon[5]asappliedto sentations in each trial is ultimately determined by the
rodents by Chaplan et al. [3] remains one of the most numberoffilamentpresentationsrequiredtoapproachthe
PWT. In this case, the PWT is assumed to exist in the
vicinity of a stimulus level where the animal first changes
*Correspondence:yves.dekoninck@neuro.ulaval.ca
1Unitédeneurosciencescellulairesetmoléculaire,Centrederecherchede itsresponsepattern:anegativeresponsefollowedbyaposi-
l’InstitutuniversitaireensantémentaledeQuébec,2601Chemindela tiveresponseorviceversa(Figure1A).Oncethisthreshold
Canardière,Québec,QCG1J2G3,Canada
is approached, another four von Frey presentations are
2DepartmentofPsychiatryandNeuroscience,UniversitéLaval,Québec,
Canada done according to up-down rules and the PWT is
©2014Boninetal.;licenseeBioMedCentralLtd.ThisisanOpenAccessarticledistributedunderthetermsoftheCreative
CommonsAttributionLicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0),whichpermitsunrestricteduse,distribution,and
reproductioninanymedium,providedtheoriginalworkisproperlycredited.TheCreativeCommonsPublicDomain
Dedicationwaiver(http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/)appliestothedatamadeavailableinthisarticle,
unlessotherwisestated.
Boninetal.MolecularPain2014,10:26 Page2of10
http://www.molecularpain.com/content/10/1/26
Figure1MousemechanosensitivitymeasuredwithvonFreyfilaments.(A)Illustrationoftheup-downvonFreytestingparadigmsdescribed
byChaplanetal.[3]andthesimplifiedup-downmethod(SUDO).(B)Frequencydistributionofthepawwithdrawalthreshold(PWT)estimates
calculatedusingthemethodofChaplanetal.,[3]forthemousedatasetthatwasanalyzed(n=1065).(C)Frequencydistributionofthemouse
PWTdividedbyexperimentertorevealdataheterogeneity(beginnern=318,intermediaten=220,expertn=527).(D)Frequencydistributionof
thetotalnumberofvonFreypresentations(trials)pertest.
calculatedbycombiningthevalueofthefinalvonFreyfila- tests that were originally conducted with mice and rats
mentusedwithanadjustmentfactorbasedontheresponse using the method of Chaplan et al. [3]. We determined
patternoftheanimal[3]. that SUDO effectively reproduces the PWT estimates
When testing is conducted with a conventional set of calculated with the method of Chaplan et al. [3]. By re-
8 different von Frey filaments [3], this method allows for ducing the number of stimuli to five in each trial we an-
a total of four to nine stimuli in each trial. This variabil- ticipate that SUDO will require, on average, nearly 30%
ity can become a source of bias since repeated testing fewer filament presentations and streamline testing and
can change the responsiveness of the animal. Such a PWT estimation. Overall, we believe that the improve-
change in responsiveness was described by Chaplan ments offered bySUDO willimprove mechanosensitivity
et al. [3], when prolonged testing sessions altered the testing times and accuracy, particularly when large
PWT ofnormal, un-operated rats.Additionally, theneed groups of mice are used, and reduce training time for
to keep track of variable numbers of stimuli can become newusers.
cumbersome and error-prone when large groups of ani-
mals aretestedsimultaneously. Results
To alleviate these drawbacks, we developed a Simpli- We first reanalyzed the results from 1065 previous
fied Up-Down method (SUDO) for mechanosensitivity mechanosensitivity measurements in C57BL/6 mice. The
testing with von Frey filaments that uses a consistent original measurements were conducted by three different
number of stimuli without affecting PWT estimation. experimenters following the method described by Chaplan
We propose using only five von Frey filament presenta- et al. [3] (Figure 1A, B). Each of the three experimenters
tions per test; the minimum possible number when test- haddifferentlevelsofexperiencewithmechanosensitiv-
ing with a set of 8 filaments in an up-down manner. We ity measurements using von Frey filaments and were
implemented a further simplification for the estimation classified as “beginner” (less than 3 months experience,
ofPWTthatemploysaconstantadjustmentfactorbased n=318), “intermediate” (more than 3 months experi-
solely on the response to the fifth stimulus, omitting the ence,n=220),and“expert”(morethanoneyearexperi-
need for look-up tables for PWTcalculation [3,5]. Using ence, n=527; Figure 1C). The data from the three
the SUDO method, we reanalyzed mechanosensitivity experimenters were obtained from mice at baseline or
Boninetal.MolecularPain2014,10:26 Page3of10
http://www.molecularpain.com/content/10/1/26
with varying degrees of experimental hyperalgesia in- We further explored whether this correlation could be
duced though several means that differed across experi- improved by using the value of the sixth filament used in-
menters. The population of PWT estimates in the stead of the fifth filament. In this case the correlation
intermediate data set calculated with the method of remained very strong (r=0.97; P<0.0001; Figure 3A), al-
Chaplan et al. [3] were significantly different from the though this correlation was not appreciably stronger than
beginnerandexpertdatasets(Kruskal-Wallisstatistic= the correlation obtained through comparison with esti-
83.8, P<0.001; intermediate vs beginner: P<0.001; mates from the fifth filament. Additionally, the PWT
intermediate vs expert: P<0.001; beginner vs expert: estimates derived from the fifth and sixth filament used
P>0.05). However, no further stratification by hyperalge- were also very highly correlated (r=0.96; P<0.0001;
sicconditionwasdonetopreservethesizeandheterogen- Figure 3B), suggesting that there is no measureable benefit
eity of the data sets. The average number of stimuli to increasing the number of filament presentations from 5
presented across all mouse trials was 6.8 (95% CI: 6.8 – to 6. Additionally, we confirmed that the correlation of
6.9;Figure1D). PWT estimates obtained with the two methods is still
ThePWTestimateswerereanalyzedwithSUDObytak- present after conversion from filament number to bending
ing the value of the fifth filament used in each testing se- force.AfterconversionofbothPWTestimatestoforce,the
quence and adding or subtracting a value of 0.5 filament correlation was again very strong (r=0.95, P<0.0001;
intervals if the response to the fifth filament was negative Figure3C).
or positive, respectively (Figure 1A). When the entire We next questioned whether the use of an adjustment
mouse data set was tested without stratification by experi- factor of±0.5 stimulus intervals based on the response
menter, SUDO produced PWT estimates that correlated to the fifth filament was optimal. To test this, the adjust-
extremelywellwiththeestimatesderivedfromthemethod ment factor was varied from 0 to 1 stimulus intervals in
of Dixon [5] (Pearson r=0.96, P<0.0001; Figure 2A). This increments of 0.1, and was added or subtracted from the
correlation remained very high regardless if the original value of the fifth filament as previously done. These
experimenter was a beginner (r=0.96, P<0.0001), PWT estimates were correlated with the estimates from
intermediate (r=0.97; P<0.0001), or expert (r=0.94; the method of Chaplan et al. [3], and the Pearson r
P<0.0001;Figure2B). values of the correlations were plotted against the
Figure2Strongcorrelationbetweenmousepawwithdrawalthreshold(PWT)estimatescalculatedusingthemethodofChaplanetal.
andSUDO.(A)CorrelationbetweenPWTestimatesdeterminedusingthetwomethodsforthemousedataset.(B)CorrelationbetweenPWT
estimatesfromthetwomethodsdividedbyexperimenter.
Boninetal.MolecularPain2014,10:26 Page4of10
http://www.molecularpain.com/content/10/1/26
Figure3ValidationoftheparametersofSUDO.(A)Strongcorrelationbetweenmousepawwithdrawalthreshold(PWT)estimatescalculated
usingSUDOwith6vonFreypresentations(trials)pertestandthemethodofChaplanetal.[3].(B)CorrelationbetweenPWTestimatescalculated
withSUDOusingfiveorsixvonFreypresentations.(C)CorrelationbetweenmousePWTestimateswhencalculatedasfilamentbendingforce
usingtheup-downmethodofChaplanetal.andSUDOwith5vonFreypresentations.(D)EffectofchangingtheadjustmentfactorforthePWT
estimationforSUDO,demonstratingapeakcorrelationbetweenPWTscalculatedusingthesimplifiedmethodandthemethodofChaplanetal.
[3]withanadjustmentfactornear0.5.
adjustment factor (Figure 3D). The plot of correlation differenceofthePWTestimates(SUDOvs.Chaplanetal.)
strength versus adjustment factor was fit with a non- for a particular response pattern and the frequency of oc-
linear quadratic function (r2=1.00) that indicated a currence of the pattern (r=−0.66, P=0.019; Figure 4B).
maximum degree ofcorrelation (r=0.96) with an adjust- This suggests that large changes in mouse responding
ment factor of±0.57. This maximal r value is equal to did not occur very frequently, which indicated that
the r value obtained with an adjustment factor of 0.5 mice are unlikely to exhibit mechanical sensitization or
stimulus intervals, indicating that 0.5 is an ideal, or very desensitization throughout a single trial. To look at this
close toideal, adjustmentvalueforthePWTcalculation. possibility directly we calculated the probability that a
The greatest difference between the PWT estimates ob- mouse would respond to the fifth through the ninth fila-
tained with the method of Chaplan et al. [3] or SUDO mentpresentationforeachtrialinthedataset.Wedidnot
wouldoccurincaseswherealargechangeinresponsepat- examinethefirstthroughfourthstimulisincetheresponse
tern occurs after the fifth filament used. For example, the probabilitiesinthesetrialswillbelargelydeterminedbydif-
pattern OOOOXXXXX would yield a withdrawal estimate ference between the actual PWTand the starting stimulus
of6.5usingthescoringmethodofDixon[5],but8.5when level. Wefound that the response probabilityto any ofthe
calculated with the simplified method. Because the largest fifththroughninthpresentationoffilamentina singletrial
differencesareseenwhentheresponsepatternbeginswith didnotsignificantlydifferfrom0.5(P>0.05forallcompar-
four consecutive negative responses (“OOOO”) and 9 isons), suggesting that mice neither sensitized nor desensi-
stimuliarepresentedpertrial,weinvestigatedalltrialswith tizedinasingletrial(Figure4C).
9 filament presentations (n=166) to determine the fre- We next prospectively determined whether SUDO and
quency with which response patterns associated with large the method of Chaplan et al. [3] produce similar PWT
differences in scoring occurred (Figure 4A). We found a estimates in mechanosensitivity tests. The PWT of mice
strong, negative correlation between the magnitude of the was measured using both methods in a randomized
Boninetal.MolecularPain2014,10:26 Page5of10
http://www.molecularpain.com/content/10/1/26
Figure4Lackofsensitizationwithinsinglemechanosensitivitytestsinmiceconductedusingup-downmethods.(A)Observed
frequencyofeachpossibleresponsepatternwhen9vonFreypresentationswereusedinatestandthecorrespondingdifferenceinthePWT
estimatesforeachpatternascalculatedusingthemethodofChaplanetal.[3]andSUDO.(B)Negativecorrelationbetweenthemagnitudeof
thedifferenceinPWTestimatescalculatedusingthetwomethodsandthefrequencywithwhicheachpatternoccurred.(C)Probabilityofa
positivenocifensiveresponsebyamousetothefifththroughninthvonFreyfilamentpresentationinalltrials.Datain(C)aremeanand95%
confidenceinterval.(D)PWTestimatesmeasuredinmiceatbaseline(n=58),3hoursafterintraplantarinjectionofcapsaicin(Cap;5μl,0.5%w/v,
n=12),and3hoursor3daysafterintraplantarinjectionofcompleteFreund’sadjuvant(CFA;10μl,n=12)usingthemethodofChaplanetal.[3]
andSUDO.Thetwotestingmethodswerepresentedinarandomizedcrossovermannerineachcondition.PWTestimateswerenotsignificantly
differentbetweenmethods.(E)Samedataasin(D)withPWTestimatedexpressedasforce(g).PWTestimateswerenotsignificantlydifferent
betweenmethods.Datain(D)and(E)aremean±s.e.m.
cross-over manner at baseline (n=58) and after intra- value of±0.5 stimulus intervals also produces the stron-
plantar injection of capsaicin (n=12) or complete gest correlation between PWT estimates from the two
Freund’s adjuvant (CFA; n=12). We found no differ- methods in the rat data set. The adjustment was again
ences in the PWT estimates of mice measured with varied from 0 to 1 in increments of 0.1, and the plot of
either method, either in terms of filament number thePearsonr values andadjustment factor wasfit witha
(all P>0.05; Figure4D)orforce(all P>0.05;Figure4E). non-linearquadraticfunction thathadamaximum value
To ascertain whether these modifications are also ap- of r=0.98 at an adjustment value of 0.53 (Figure 5D).
plicable to testing with other animals, we reanalyzed von This indicates than an adjustment factor of 0.5 stimulus
Frey results from rats obtained following the method of intervals is ideal, or close to ideal, for testing in rats. We
Chaplan et al. [3]. 300 trials from a single experimenter also confirmed that the correlation between PWT esti-
were reanalyzed using SUDO (Figure 5A). The average mated obtained with SUDO or the method of Chaplan
number of stimuli presented in these trials was 6.6 (95% et al. [3] did not change after converting the PWT esti-
CI: 6.5 – 6.7). We again observed an extremely strong mates from fiber number to bending force (r=0.98, P<
correlation between the PWT estimated obtained with 0.0001; Figure 5E). Similar to the mouse results, we also
the two methods(r=0.98, P<0.0001; Figure 5B). Similar did not observe any indication of sensitization in the rat
to the reanalysis of the mouse data, reanalyzing the rat data: the response probability at the fifth through ninth
data using the value of the sixth filament used did not filamentpresentationdidnot significantlydiffer from 0.5
produce any further improvement of this correlation (P>0.05for all;Figure 5F).
(r=0.97; p<0.0001; Figure 5C). This suggests that five
filament presentations are sufficient to reproduce the Discussion
PWT estimates for rats obtained with the method of Our analysis confirms that SUDO provides a reliable al-
Chaplan et al. [3]. We also tested whether an adjustment ternative to the up-down method of Dixon [5] as
Boninetal.MolecularPain2014,10:26 Page6of10
http://www.molecularpain.com/content/10/1/26
Figure5SUDOisvalidforPWTestimationinrats.(A)Frequencydistributionoftheratpawwithdrawalthreshold(PWT)estimatescalculated
usingthemethodofChaplanetal.,([3];n=300).(B)StrongcorrelationbetweenPWTestimatesdeterminedusingthemethodofChaplanetal.
[3]andSUDO.(C)CorrelationbetweenmousePWTestimatescalculatedusingsixvonFreypresentations(trials)andthemethodofChaplanetal.
[3].(D)Effectofchangingtheadjustmentfactorinthesimplifiedscoringmethod,demonstratingapeakcorrelationwithanadjustmentfactor
near0.5.(E)CorrelationbetweenmousePWTestimatescalculatedwiththetwomethodswhencalculatedasfilamentbendingforce.(F)
ProbabilityofapositivenocifensiveresponsebyarattothefifththroughninthvonFreyfilamentpresentationinalltrials.Datain(F)aremean
and95%confidenceinterval.
adapted by Chaplan et al. [3] for the estimation of PWT No effort was made to distinguish between the differ-
(Figure 6). We validated the use of five filament presen- ent experimental populations in the data sets, where
tations in each test and the use a constant adjustment mechanical hypersensitivity was induced through differ-
factor of 0.5 stimulus intervals for the simplified PWT ent means. By grouping all the results together we cre-
estimate. There was no improvement in the PWT esti- ated amuch more heterogeneous data set thanwould be
mates obtained with six filaments as compared to five, produced if the data sets were stratified by condition.
which is the minimum possible in a set of eight or nine Webelievethatthisheterogeneousdatasetisrepresenta-
filaments when starting testing in the middle of the rage, tive of data from mechanosensitivity experiments, where
indicating that the use of five von Frey presentations is both normal and pathological conditions may be tested
sufficient for testing. Additionally, an adjustment factor simultaneously and where the experimenter should to be
of 0.5 stimulus intervals was found to be an ideal value blind totheparticularexperimental conditionoftheani-
in terms of conceptual simplicity and strength of correl- mal.Notably,thestrongestcorrelationbetweenPWTes-
ationbetweenthetwo methods. timates was seen in datasets that covered the widest
Boninetal.MolecularPain2014,10:26 Page7of10
http://www.molecularpain.com/content/10/1/26
Figure6FlowchartsummarizingmechanosensitivitytestingprotocolsofChaplanetal.andSUDO.InthemethodofChaplanetal.[3],
thethresholdisconsideredtohavebeenreachedthefirsttimethattheresponseoftheanimaltoavonFreyfilamentisdifferentfromthe
previoustrial,afterwhichfouradditionalvonFreypresentationsareconductedinanup-downmanner.Attheendofthetrialthepaw
withdrawalestimate(PWT)iscalculatedbytakingthevalueofthefinalfilamentusedandaddinganadjustmentfactorderivedfromtheresponse
patternusingthecalculationsofDixon[5].InSUDO,onlyfivevonFreyfilamentpresentationsaredoneineachtestandthePWTisestimated
directlyfromtheresponsetothefinalfilamentbyincorporatingafixedadjustmentfactorbasedontheresponsetothefifthfilament.Seetext
foradditionaldetails.
range of withdrawal threshold estimates (rat and “inter- support this, where the use of SUDO or the method of
mediate” set in mouse) indicative of the broadest range Chaplan et al. [3] produced similar PWT estimates in
of observed mechanosensitivity. This implies that SUDO animals under baseline conditions or after the induction
replicates the estimates obtained with the method of of hyperalgesia by intraplantar capaicin or CFA. More-
Chaplan et al. [3] irrespective of pathology or range of over, very strong correlations between scoring methods
hyperalgesia. Our data from behavioral experiments wereobtainedindatasetsthatweresignificantlydifferent
Boninetal.MolecularPain2014,10:26 Page8of10
http://www.molecularpain.com/content/10/1/26
from each other (mouse intermediate vs. expert or be- calculated by Dixon [5] are dependent on the response
ginner), demonstrating broad applicability of our pattern throughout the trial and are derived using a
method. maximum probability estimate to obtain the 50% re-
The simplifications proposed here are limited to tests sponse threshold. While this is a sound statistical ap-
that use a set of eight or nine filaments. Thus, SUDO proach for the estimation of the 50% response threshold,
will likely be applicable in any testing system where the this degree of precision may not be necessary for the es-
relevant up-down testing range can be divided into eight timation of PWT as demonstrated by the very strong
or nine equally spaced stimulus levels. We did not test correlation between the PWT estimates derived using
whether similar modifications can be made in systems SUDO and the method of Chaplan et al. [3]. An adjust-
with more than nine filaments, which would require a ment factor of 0.5 stimulus intervals has the additional
minimum of 6 or more stimuli presentations to cover benefitof beingaconceptuallysimple value,allowing for
the full testing range. However, increasing the minimum the quick manual addition or subtraction of half a
number of trials necessary diminishes the time savings stimulusintervaltocalculate thePWTestimate.
from these simplifications and may exacerbate the pos-
sible testing bias created by repeated resting [3]. Add- Conclusion
itionally, it is unlikely that dividing the relevant sensory ThepresentstudyvalidatestheuseofSUDOformechano-
rangeintomorethaneightorninestimulilevelswillsig- sensitivitytestinginrodentswithvonFreyfibers.Oursim-
nificantly enhance the accuracy of the PWT estimate plified method effectively reproduces the PWT estimates
given the relative insensitivity of the up-down method of obtainedwiththewidelyusedmethodofChaplanetal.[3],
Dixon tothespacing ofthestimuluslevels[5]. butwithafasterandmoreuser-friendlyapproach.
We saw no evidence of sensitization or changes in re-
sponsiveness over the single trials analyzed here. Indeed, Methods
the probability of a positive response to the fifth through Dataanalysis
ninth stimulus in a testing sequence was never signifi- Data from previous von Frey tests in 1065 mice and 300
cantly different from 0.5 in rats or mice. However, this rats were entered into a spreadsheet for analysis. In each
finding does not exclude the possibility that sensitization test,twoseparatetrialswereconductedandaveragedtoob-
can occur across trials during repeated testing, as re- tain the PWT. Tests were excluded if any of response pat-
ported by Chaplan et al. [3]. Because fewer stimuli are terns recorded did not correspond to the testing method
required for the simplified testing method here com- described by Chaplan et al. [3] or would have required the
pared to the up-down method of Chaplan et al. [3], we use of filaments outside the specified range. The values of
speculate ourapproachwillfurtherreducethepossibility thevonFreyfilamentsreportedhererepresentthenumber
ofsensitizationoccurringwithrepeatedtesting. of the filament within a complete set of 20 von Frey fila-
Our simplified method uses a fixed number of stimuli ments that spans a range of force from 0.008 g to 300 g
per trial that is independent from the response pattern (Stoelting, Dale Wood, IL, USA). In the original mouse
of the mouse. This has several advantages. It ensures a tests, filaments numbered 2 through 9 were used, while in
constant number of stimuli per animal, which may help rat tests filaments 7 through 14 were used. Testing always
reducemeasurementbiasthatcouldarisefromlargedis- began with filament 5 for mice and filament 10 for rats,
parities in the number of stimuli given to different mice and the testing sequenceprogressed following anup-down
or rats. Additionally, using a constant number of stimuli sequence such that a positive response to a particular fila-
is methodologically simpler than using a variable num- mentindicatedthenextlowervaluefilamentbeusedinthe
ber of stimuli, which we believe would reduce training subsequent test, while a negative response indicated the
time for new experimenters and reduce the risk of ex- nexthighervaluefilamentbeused[3].Testingwasstopped
perimenter error associated with the need to track vari- if a positive response to the lowest possible filament or a
able stimulation numbers in large groups of animals. negative response to the highest possible filament was
Finally,the useofonly five stimuli equates toatime sav- observed.
ings of nearly 30% compared to the average number of The PWT estimate was first calculated from the re-
stimuli used in the data sets analyzed here. These time sponse pattern using methods described in Chaplan
savings may become substantial when tests are con- et al. [3]. For this, an adjustment factor was determined
ducted on large groups of animals and mice in particu- by the response pattern in the trial and added to the
lar, which typically move more and take longer to test final filament value used in the trial (Figure 1A).Thead-
than rats[4]. justment factors were obtained from the look-up tables
We further validate the use of a constant adjustment developed by Dixon for this purpose [5]. For SUDO, the
factor of 0.5 stimulus intervals to replace the adjustment PWT estimate was calculated by taking the value of the
factors calculated by Dixon [5]. The adjustment factors fifthfilamentusedineachtestandaddinganadjustment
Boninetal.MolecularPain2014,10:26 Page9of10
http://www.molecularpain.com/content/10/1/26
value of±0.5 stimulus intervals (Figure 1A). The adjust- et al. [3]. x and B were determined from a linear regres-
ment factor was positive if there was no response to the sion of the logarithm of the empirically measured fila-
fifth filament of the sequence to generate a PWTslightly ment bending force plotted against the filament number
higher than the fifth filament value, or negative if there usingtheequation:
was a withdrawal to generate a PWTslightly lower than
the fifth filament value. Because whole numbers were LogðbendingforceÞ¼x (cid:2) FilamentnumberþB:
used for the filament values, this adjustment corre-
sponded to an actual adjustment of±0.5 from the value Because different filament sets were used for mice and
of the fifth filament used. In some instances a variant of rats, the linear regression for each set produced different
SUDO was used in which PWT was derived from the constants. For the mouse filament set, x=0.240 and
sixth filament used in the sequence, or the absolute ad- B=−2.00, and for the rat filament set x=0.182 and
justment factor was varied from 0 to 1 in increments of B=−1.47. The two trials in each test were converted to
0.1stimulusintervals. force before averaging to obtain the PWT in terms of fila-
The use of whole numbers to represent the filament mentbendingforce.
value is a valid approach since the estimation of the Statistical analyses were performed using Prism 5
PWT using the up-down method of Dixon [5] assumes (GraphPad, San Diego, CA, USA). Linear regression,
that the stimuli are equally spaced on an appropriate correlation, or non-linear curve fitting were used as ap-
scale. It would also have been appropriate to use the propriate. Mouse data sets for beginner, intermediate
manufacturer-provided filament values (e.g., 2.83, 3.22, and expert were compared using a Kruskal-Wallis test
3.61, etc.), which are logarithmically related to the actual followed by Dunn’s multiple comparison post-test to
bending force of the filament and can also be fitted with compare between groups. To analyze the response prob-
a linear relation for the calculation of the 50% with- abilities, the responses at each filament presentation
drawal thresholds. However, we preferred the use of were compared to theoretical a value of 0.5 using a Wil-
whole numbers because they allowedfor amuch simpler coxon signedrank test.
calculation of PWT by using an adjustment factor of±
0.5 based on the stimulus intervals, yet do not alter the Mechanosensitivitytesting
final outcome of the experiment. Moreover, it is equally All prospective mechanosensitivity experiments with an-
possible to calculate the bending force of the filament imals were conducted in accordance with the guidelines
from either the filament number of manufacturer- from the Canadian Council on Animal Care and ap-
providedfilamentnumbers. proval of the Laval University Animal Care Committee.
Notably,differentmethodsofinducingexperimentalpain PWT was measured in adult male C57BL/6 mice using
hypersensitivity were used in the original experiments by von Frey filaments 2 through 9. Mice were placed in
thedifferentexperimenters,includingintraplantarinjection acrylic chambers (5.5 × 10 cm) suspended above a wire
of capsaicin (mice; beginner, intermediate) or CFA (mice; mesh grid and allowed to acclimatize to the testing ap-
intermediate),experimentalautoimmuneencephalomyelitis paratus for 1 hour prior to experiments. When the
(mice; expert), repetitive paw stimulation (mice; beginner), mouse was not moving the von Frey filaments were
and nerve injury (rats). We did not distinguish between pressed against the plantar surface of the paw until the
naïveorhyperalgesicanimalsinanyoftheoriginaldatasets filament buckled and held for a maximum of 3 seconds.
since the degree of mechanical hypersensitivity can vary A positive response was noted if the paw was sharply
greatly both over time and between different experimental withdrawn on application of the filament. Flinching im-
conditions, requiring the creation of many datasets for mediately upon removal of the filament was also consid-
comparison with small sample sizes. We further reasoned ered a positive response as previously described [3].
that the heterogeneity in mechanosensitivity produced by Testing began with filament number 5 and progressed
pooling all experimental conditions is more representative according to an up-down method. Mice were randomly
of the variability that would often be observed in experi- assigned to be tested either with the method of Chaplan
mentsdesignedtostudymechanicalhypersensitivity. et al. [3] or SUDO. After the first measurement of PWT,
In some cases the PWT was converted from filament a second measurement of PWT was conducted using
number to force, and expressed in grams using the the alternate test. In some prospective experiments,
equation: hyperalgesia was induced by intraplantar injection of
capsaicin (0.5% w/v, 5 μl) or complete Freund’s adjuvant
PWT ¼10 ðx (cid:2) FþBÞ; (CFA;10μl)inone hindpawunder briefanesthesia with
force
isoflurane (<3 minutes, 4% isoflurane). PWT was mea-
where F is the PWT calculated in terms of filament sured 3 hours after intraplantar injection of either com-
number using either SUDO or the method of Chaplan pound and again 3 days after injection of CFA. The
Boninetal.MolecularPain2014,10:26 Page10of10
http://www.molecularpain.com/content/10/1/26
PWT estimates derived using SUDO or the method of
Chaplan et al. [3] for each condition were compared
usingapairedt-test inGraphpadPrism 5.
Abbreviations
CFA:CompleteFreund’sadjuvant;PWT:Pawwithdrawalthreshold;
SUDO:Simplifiedup-downmethod.
Competinginterests
Theauthorsdeclarethattheyhavenocompetinginterests.
Authors’contributions
RPBconductedthebehavioralexperimentsandanalyzedthedata,andall
authorsdesignedthestudyandwrotethemanuscript.Allauthorsreadand
approvedthefinalmanuscript.
Acknowledgements
WewouldliketothankKarineBachand,MireilleDesrochers-Coutureand
SophieLaffrayfortheirassistancewiththedatacollection,andDr.JeffreyS.
Mogilforhishelpwiththepreparationofthemanuscript.Theauthors
acknowledgesupportbytheCanadianInstitutesofHealthResearch(MOP
12942toYDK).RPBwassupportedbyapost-doctoralFellowshipfromthe
FondsderechercheQuébec–Santé(FRQS)andtheCatherineBushnellPain
ResearchFellowshipfromtheLouiseandAlanEdwardsfoundation.YDKwas
aChercheurNationaloftheFRQS.
Received:3February2014Accepted:10April2014
Published:16April2014
References
1. RuscheweyhR,Wilder-SmithO,DrdlaR,LiuX-G,SandkühlerJ:Long-term
potentiationinspinalnociceptivepathwaysasanoveltargetforpain
therapy.MolPain2011,7:20.
2. MogilJS:Animalmodelsofpain:progressandchallenges.NatRev
Neurosci2009,10:283–294.
3. ChaplanSR,BachFW,PogrelJW,ChungJM,YakshTL:Quantitative
assessmentoftactileallodyniaintheratpaw.JNeurosciMethods1994,
53:55–63.
4. MogilJS,WilsonSG,WanY:Assessingnociceptioninmurinesubjects.In
MethodsinPainResearch.EditedbyKrugerL.BocaRaton:CRCPress;
2001:11–39.
5. DixonW:Theup-and-downmethodforsmallsamples.JAmStatAssoc
1965,60:967–978.
6. MillsC,LeBlondD,JoshiS,ZhuC,HsiehG,JacobsonP,MeyerM,DeckerM:
EstimatingefficacyanddrugED ’susingvonFreyThresholds:impactof
50
Weber’sLawandLogTransformation.JPain2012,13:519–523.
doi:10.1186/1744-8069-10-26
Citethisarticleas:Boninetal.:Asimplifiedup-downmethod(SUDO)
formeasuringmechanicalnociceptioninrodentsusingvonFrey
filaments.MolecularPain201410:26.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color figure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit