Reconsolidation and the regulation
of plasticity: moving beyond memory
Robert P. Bonin1 and Yves De Koninck1,2
1Institut Universitaire en Sante´ Mentale de Que´ bec, Que´ bec, Canada
2Department of Psychiatry and Neuroscience, Universite´ Laval, Que´ bec, Canada
Memory reconsolidation is a protein synthesis-depen-
dent process that preserves, in some form, memories
that have been destabilized through recall. Reconsolida-
tion is a nearly universal phenomenon, occurring in a
diverse array of species and learning tasks. The function
of reconsolidation remains unclear but it has been pro-
posed as a mechanism for updating or strengthening
memories. Observations of an analog of reconsolidation
in vitro and in sensory systems indicate that reconsoli-
dation is unlikely to be a learning-specific phenomenon
and may serve a broader function. We propose that
reconsolidation arises from the activity-dependent in-
duction of two coincident but opposing processes: the
depotentiation and repotentiation of strengthened syn-
apses. These processes suggest that reconsolidation
reflects a fundamental mechanism that regulates and
preserves synaptic strength.
Specific versus general view of reconsolidation
The ability to learn and store information in the form of
memories is crucial for the survival of many organisms.
Equally important is the ability to modify or update these
memories to accurately reflect a changing environment.
Over the past 15 years there has been a considerable
amount of research into one process that is thought to
enable the modification and updating of consolidated (see
Glossary) memories: memory reconsolidation. The process
of memory reconsolidation is triggered by the recall of a
memory. Recall transiently destabilizes the reactivated
memory and renders it labile, after which the memory
restabilizes (‘reconsolidates’) to remain stored. Preventing
the reconsolidation process, for example, by blocking pro-
tein synthesis, leads to disruption of the memory [1]. This
cycle of memory destabilization and reconsolidation
appears to provide a window of opportunity for the modifi-
cation of learned associations [2,3].
Reconsolidation was brought to the fore of neuroscience
research in 2000, when it was shown that inhibiting pro-
tein synthesis in the amygdala during the recall of a fear
memory resulted in disruption of the memory [1]. The
necessity of protein synthesis provided evidence for a
cellular mechanism of reconsolidation that
the
paralleled
well-studied process of memory consolidation [4], trig-
gering an explosion of research into the mechanisms and
parameters of memory reconsolidation. Since this revital-
izing study, reconsolidation has been demonstrated to be a
nearly universal phenomenon. Memory reconsolidation
has been observed in more than 10 diverse species, from
C. elegans to humans, and has been observed in several
regions of the central nervous system (CNS) including the
hippocampus, amygdala, and anterior cingulate cortex
(reviewed in [3,5]). Despite this wealth of information,
the overall function of reconsolidation remains unclear.
The scientific origin of reconsolidation has largely
branded reconsolidation as a learning-specific phenome-
non, and theories of the functional role of reconsolidation
have centered on its putative role in the modification and
updating of memories [2,3,6–8]. In this article we re-eval-
uate the functional role of reconsolidation in light of in vitro
and in vivo evidence that this phenomenon may exist
broadly throughout the CNS [9], and is thus unlikely to
serve a learning-specific function. We argue that reconso-
lidation instead reflects a fundamental mechanism for the
regulation of synaptic plasticity, and present evidence that
the cellular processes mediating this regulation serve to
constrain activity-dependent synaptic potentiation in the
nervous system.
Functional significance of reconsolidation
Reconsolidation has been proposed to serve two general
functions: the modification and/or strengthening of memo-
ries [2,7,8]. The modification of memories through recon-
solidation may maintain memory relevance by
Opinion
allowing
Glossary
Consolidation: the stabilization of a memory trace after acquisition.
Depotentiation/repotentiation: a reduction/increase in the strength of a
synapse that has been potentiated by some stimulus.
Fear conditioning: a learning paradigm in which a stimulus becomes
associated with fear.
Heterosynaptic plasticity: changes in synaptic strength that can be induced
through activity at other synapses or through other cellular processes.
Homeostatic plasticity: the adjustment of synaptic strength to regulate
neuronal activity.
Homosynaptic plasticity: changes in synaptic strength that are input-specific
and restricted to only the activated synapses.
Hyperalgesia: increased sensitivity to painful stimuli.
Long-term potentiation (LTP)/depression (LTD): an increase/decrease in
synaptic strength that persists for hours or longer in response to an induction
stimulus.
Synaptic plasticity: the ability to modify the strength of a
0166-2236/
(cid:2)
synapse.
2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Corresponding
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2015.04.007
author: Bonin, R.P. (robert.bonin@crulrg.ulaval.ca).
Keywords: long-term potentiation; heterosynaptic plasticity; homeostatic plasticity;
reconsolidation; protein synthesis; protein degradation.
336 Trends in Neurosciences, June 2015, Vol. 38, No. 6
the encoding of changes in the environment [10]. In
humans, memories can be modified through the incorpo-
ration of new or conflicting information only after recall of
the original memory [11,12]. Similar results were observed
in animal studies, where memory recall rendered memory
labile and vulnerable to modification [13–16].
One interesting prediction of the memory update func-
tion of reconsolidation is that the subsequent updating of
memory should be most strongly triggered when recall
occurs in a context that is slightly different than the
original memory, necessitating an update of the stored
memory to reflect the changes [17]. In this case, the induc-
tion of reconsolidation should be dependent on some ele-
ment of novelty during recall. This was precisely the case in
a study by Winters et al. [18], in which changing the texture
of the flooring during a recall trial was necessary to enable
reconsolidation of a well-trained object memory in rodents.
Modifying the timing of a shock delivered during re-expo-
sure to a fear-conditioning apparatus was also sufficient to
induce reconsolidation of memories that were otherwise
resistant to reconsolidation [19]. However, reconsolidation
can occur even in the absence of explicitly novel informa-
tion [1,15,20], indicating that the novelty is not an absolute
requirement for reconsolidation.
Reconsolidation may also enable the strengthening of
memories. This would allow the enhancement of behavior-
al responses through recall without requiring re-exposure
to the original learning situation [7,8]. The strengthening
of memory after reconsolidation has been described in both
animal models [13,21,22] and in humans [12]. However,
the strengthening of memory after recall is not seen in
every case. Indeed, animal studies exploring reconsolida-
tion often do not find stronger behavioral responses after
memory recall that would indicate the enhancement of
memory. For example, the degree of freezing used as a
measure of memory in fear-conditioning studies does not
typically increase after the recall trial (e.g., [1,15], but see
[13,22]). This lack of effect is unlikely to result from a
ceiling effect in training because it is possible to pharma-
cologically manipulate reconsolidation to generate memo-
ry strengthening after recall [23–25]. One possible
explanation for a lack of memory strengthening after
reconsolidation is that the recall of a memory in the
absence of a conditioning stimulus such as an electric shock
promotes memory extinction, which reduces the behavioral
expression of the previously learned association and
opposes the effects of memory strengthening induced by
reconsolidation. In a recent report, Fukushima et al. [21]
explore this possible balance through the elegant use an
inhibitory avoidance assay designed to trigger reconsolida-
tion under conditions that do not promote extinction learn-
ing. In the absence of extinction learning, the retrieval of a
fear memory was shown to promote memory enhancement
through reconsolidation. Thus, memory recall may acti-
vate multiple processes with opposite effects on memory
strength, and whose net balance determines the overall
effect of recall on memory strength.
The strengthening and modification of memories are not
necessarily mutually exclusive outcomes of reconsolida-
tion, and it is plausible that both of these effects can arise
from similar underlying mechanisms. Indeed, both
strengthening
memory
and modification can be seen after recall in
the same behavioral assay, depending on the conditions of
recall [15]. Nonetheless, these interpretations of reconsoli-
dation are still rooted in the idea of reconsolidation as a
learning-specific phenomenon. This is reasonable given that
the study of behavioral reconsolidation has essentially been
entirely restricted to learning tasks [2,3,6]. However, recent
in vitro and in vivo work provides evidence that reconsolida-
tion is not restricted to learning tasks and may exist broadly
throughout the nervous system, encouraging a re-evalua-
tion of the functional role of reconsolidation.
Reconsolidation beyond memory
We have recently demonstrated that a reconsolidation-like
phenomenon can also be observed in pain-processing cir-
cuits of the spinal cord [9]. In this study, mechanical
hyperalgesia was induced by the injection of capsaicin into
the hind paws of mice. Three hours after the initial plantar
injection, capsaicin was reinjected into the hind paw to
reactivate the sensitized pain pathways. Although the
second capsaicin injection did not modify hyperalgesia
on its own, normal mechanosensitivity was quickly re-
stored when this second injection of capsaicin was paired
with the spinal administration of the protein synthesis
inhibitor, anisomycin, via intrathecal injection. These find-
ings indicate that the reactivation of sensitized spinal pain
pathways rendered the hyperalgesia labile and reversible
in a manner equivalent to the disruption of fear memories
through reconsolidation impairment.
The observation of a reconsolidation-like phenomenon
in spinal cord pain-processing circuits is not inconceivable
given the strong mechanistic parallels between learning
and the development of some forms of hyperalgesia
(reviewed in [26–28]). Indeed, persistent hyperalgesia
has been called a ‘memory trace of pain’ or pain ‘engram’
because of these mechanistic similarities [29,30]. Neverthe-
less, the observation of reconsolidation in spinal pain-
processing pathways encourages a re-examination of the
function of reconsolidation on the basis of one key point:
given that reconsolidation is not restricted to learning
tasks, it is unlikely to be a unique property of learned
associations. This shift in the interpretation of reconsoli-
dation does not contradict the proposals of reconsolidation
as a means of memory trace strengthening or updating.
Rather, we propose that the broad existence of reconsoli-
dation suggests that it may serve a more fundamental role
in the regulation of plasticity than possibly predicted from
an analysis of reconsolidation solely within learning para-
digms.
Re-evaluating the functional role of reconsolidation
A close examination of the processes triggered by reactiva-
tion of a memory trace reveals the existence of two opposing
processes that can be recruited to enable the labilization of
memory: a destabilizing process and a protein synthesis-
dependent reconsolidation process (Figure 1A). The activity-
dependent destabilizing process can be revealed by the
inhibition of protein synthesis after reactivation of the
memory trace. This typically leads to the disruption of
the learned association that is a hallmark of assays designed
to study reconsolidation. The labile state of memory
Opinion Trends
has
in Neurosciences June 2015, Vol. 38, No. 6
337
been previously described as arising from two distinct pro-
cesses of destabilization and reconsolidation [17,31–34], and
there is molecular evidence to support such a division. In
auditory fear-conditioning experiments, the blockade of
GluN2B subunit-containing NMDA receptors in the baso-
lateral amygdala prevented the memory from becoming
labile, while blockade of GluN2A-containing NMDA recep-
tors only prevented repotentiation of the memory, indicat-
ing that the two processes are activated through separate
signaling mechanisms [35].
The destabilization process is necessarily independent
of protein synthesis because it persists following inhibition
of protein synthesis. The reactivation of a consolidated
memory trace triggers the active degradation of proteins
necessary for the maintenance of the memory trace, in-
cluding the synaptic scaffolding proteins Shank (SH3 and
multiple ankyrin repeat domains) and GKAP (guanylate
kinase-associated protein) [13,19,21,36–38] (Box 1). Pro-
tein degradation induced by memory retrieval involves
protein polyubiquitination and proteasomal degradation
[39]. Protein degradation is necessary for the disruption or
modification of a reactivated memory trace because inhi-
bition of the proteasome prevents the disruption of a
recalled memory by protein synthesis inhibition
[13,19,33,34,36–38]. The polyubiquitination of proteins
occurs after memory recall even in the absence of protein
synthesis inhibition typically used in
assays
reconsolidation
[37,38], indicating that the degradation of proteins
is not an artifact of protein synthesis inhibition.
Memory recall also triggers reconsolidation, which
counters the destabilization process and maintains the
memory trace. Reconsolidation is dependent on protein-
synthesis and is necessary for the preservation of the
memory trace after recall. Several transcriptional control
pathways have been implicated in memory repotentiation,
including protein kinase A [24,40], protein kinase C [41],
ERK/MAP kinase [42,43], CaMKII [34], mTOR activation
[44,45], as well as the transcription factors CREB [46], C/
EBPd [47], NF-kB [48,49], Zif268 [19], and NPAS4
[50]. The de novo synthesis of mRNA is also crucial for
reconsolidation [51]. Several recent review articles de-
scribe the molecular mechanisms of destabilization and
reconsolidation processes in detail [2,3,5,52,53], and these
will not be further reviewed here.
Functional links between destabilization and
reconsolidation
The destabilization and reconsolidation processes appear
to be mechanistically intertwined, whereby both processes
are dependent on protein degradation (Box 1). If destabi-
lization and reconsolidation were mechanistically dis-
tinct, it is expected that preventing the destabilization
process alone by inhibiting protein degradation would
enable the strengthening of memories after recall through
htgnerts
c(cid:2)panyS
(A) Behavioral reconsolida(cid:2)on
Labile memory
Memory forma(cid:2)on Stored Recall Destabiliza(cid:2)on and Stored
(consolida(cid:2)on) memory reconsolida(cid:2)on memory
Synap(cid:2)c reconsolida(cid:2)on
Labile plas(cid:2)city
Strong synap(cid:2)c Poten(cid:2)ated Reac(cid:2)va(cid:2)on Depoten(cid:2)a(cid:2)on and Poten(cid:2)ated
ac(cid:2)va(cid:2)on synapse repoten(cid:2)a(cid:2)on synapse
(B) Blocked depoten(cid:2)a(cid:2)on?
Blocked repoten(cid:2)a(cid:2)on
TRENDS in Neurosciences
Figure 1. The ups and downs of reconsolidation. Schematics of the processes involved in reconsolidation at the behavioral and synaptic levels are shown in (A). The
activation of memory destabilizing and reconsolidation processes by memory recall places the memory into a labile state, in which it can be disrupted through the
application of protein synthesis inhibitors. (B) Synaptic potentiation can be induced by strong activation of a synapse (yellow bolt), leading to an increase of the synaptic
strength. This synaptic potentiation is thought to underlie memory and some forms of hyperalgesia [27]. Reactivation of the strengthened synapse, as might occur during
memory recall, triggers the induction of two opposing processes: the depotentiation (blue arrow) and repotentiation of synaptic strength (red arrow). These two processes
often cancel out to produce no net change in synaptic strength; however, preventing repotentiation through the inhibition of protein synthesis can lead to a net
depotentiation of the synapse. Behaviorally, this can be seen as the blockade of reconsolidation and the disruption of memory. It has not yet been conclusively
demonstrated whether the selective prevention of depotentiation can lead to additional synaptic strengthening or memory
Opinion
Trends
augmentation.
in Neurosciences June 2015, Vol. 38, No. 6
338
unbalanced repotentiation. However, this has not yet been
directly observed, and inhibition of protein degradation
often, but not always [54], prevents the destabilization of
memory after recall but does not alter the strength of a
recalled memory [13,19,33,34,36–38]. In addition, the inhi-
bition of protein degradation not only failed to produce
further memory strengthening but even prevented recall-
induced strengthening in an inhibitory avoidance assay
designed to reveal an enhancement of memory strength
through recall [21]. As a notable parallel with reconsolida-
tion, the initial formation of long-term memories [33,54,55],
and the stabilization of late-phase long-term potentiation
(LTP) in vitro [56], may also depend on protein degradation
(Box 1). Indeed, the inhibition of protein degradation imme-
diately, but not 3 h, after initial learning or recall prevented
both consolidation and reconsolidation, respectively [54],
suggesting that similar mechanisms may act in both con-
solidation and reconsolidation. Overall, it remains to be
determined whether it is possible to mechanistically sepa-
rate memory destabilization and reconsolidation, such
preventing
that
destabilization leads to the further potentiation
of the memory through unbalanced reconsolidation
(Figure 1B and Box 2).
Reconsolidation at the synapse
Working from the premise that reconsolidation is widely
distributed in the nervous system, it becomes essential to
question the function of the opposing processes of destabi-
lization and reconsolidation in broader terms by consider-
ing their cellular correlates at the level of synaptic
plasticity that contributes to mnemonic traces. In a strik-
ing parallel to behavioral studies, the reactivation of po-
tentiated synapses can trigger a synaptic depotentiation
process that is unmasked by the inhibition of protein
synthesis, and a countering, protein synthesis-dependent,
synaptic ‘repotentiation’ process (Figure 1B) [9,44,57–59].
In vivo electrophysiological recordings revealed that long-
term (but not short-term) facilitation of auditory-evoked
field potentials in the lateral amygdala was rendered labile
and able to undergo depotentiation after recall
Box
following
1. How can protein degradation lead to synaptic strengthening?
Protein degradation has been implicated as a key process in both the
depotentiation and repotentiation processes of synaptic reconsolida-
tion. At first glance it can seem paradoxical that a destructive process
such as protein degradation can result in synaptic strengthening or
repotentiation. However, synaptic plasticity is determined by a
multitude of proteins, some of which act to negatively modulate
synaptic strength or constrain further synaptic potentiation; the
removal of these inhibitory controls can produce synaptic facilitation
(Figure I). Protein degradation associated with plasticity is mediated,
in large part, by the ubiquitin–proteasome system [39]. Functionally,
inhibiting the proteasome can enhance the induction, but impair the
maintenance of LTP in vitro [56,76], consistent with a facilitating role
of protein degradation in plasticity. Inhibition of the proteasome after
the induction of LTP leads to the accumulation of the translational
repressors PAIP2 and 4E-BP2 [77]. In addition, NMDA receptor
activation can induce proteasomal degradation of MOV10, a compo-
nent of the RNA-mediated gene silencing complex (RISC), in cultured
neurons [78]. These findings indicate that the synthesis of proteins
associated with long-term plasticity is disinhibited through the
activity-dependent proteasomal degradation of repressor proteins.
Synaptic strength can also be augmented through the degradation of
Arc, a protein that facilitates the internalization of AMPA receptors
[79,80]. The mechanisms by which protein degradation contributes to
the repotentiation process of reconsolidation are much less clear, but
likely involve similar disinhibitory processes. For example, MOV10 is
also ubiquitinated and degraded following memory retrieval
Ub
Shank GKAP
PSD-95
UPS
Ub
Arc
Ub Endocytosis
MOV10
+
Transla(cid:2)on
Inser(cid:2)on
[36]. Key: Poten(cid:2)a(cid:2)on process
Depoten(cid:2)a(cid:2)on process
TRENDS in Neurosciences
Figure I. Protein degradation regulates synaptic strength. Protein degradation
mediated by the ubiquitin–proteasome system (UPS) can induce both reductions
(blue arrows) and enhancements (red arrows) of synaptic strength. AMPA
receptors are stabilized at the membrane by synaptic adhesion molecules
including Shank and GKAP. These adhesion molecules are degraded during the
depotentiation process of reconsolidation. AMPA receptor endocytosis is
regulated by Arc in an activity-dependent manner, and the degradation of Arc
can enhance synaptic strength. Notably, the endocytosis of AMPA receptors is a
necessary process for the membrane insertion of AMPA receptors during
repotentiation. The translation of new synaptic proteins necessary for
repotentiation is regulated by translational repressors, such as MOV10. The
degradation of these repressors is also activity-dependent and contributes to
reconsolidation. Abbreviations: Arc, activity-regulated cytoskeleton-associated
protein; GKAP, guanylate kinase-associated protein, also known as DLGAP1
(discs large homolog-associated protein 1); MOV10, Mov10 RISC complex RNA
helicase; PSD-95, postsynaptic density 95; Shank, SH3 and multiple ankyrin
repeat domains; Ub,
Opinion Trends
ubiquitin.
in Neurosciences June 2015, Vol. 38, No. 6
339
the inhibition of protein synthesis, similarly to memory
destabilization [57]. However, the facilitated field poten-
tials did not exhibit additional facilitation upon reactiva-
tion of cortical and thalamic inputs to the lateral amygdala
after fear conditioning [44]. In the hippocampus, field
potentials evoked at CA3 to CA1 synapses were facilitated
after novel object recognition training but, again, were not
further potentiated after reconsolidation [58]. Notably,
reconsolidation in this study was accompanied by transient
depotentiation of the field potentials at the CA3 to CA1
synapse immediately after recall, and this was attributed
to synapses entering a ‘labile’ state [58].
Studies of reconsolidation in vitro have also failed to
reveal a robust increase in synaptic potentiation after
reactivation of potentiated synapses (Figure 2). In
the spinal cord dorsal horn, long-term enhancement
synaptic
of
strength was not further increased by a second
induction stimulus, but was reversed to baseline levels
when the second stimulus was applied in the presence of
protein synthesis inhibitors [9]. In addition, the stimula-
tion of hippocampal slices several hours after the initial
induction of LTP did not cause further synaptic potentia-
tion, but initiated a reversal of late-phase LTP when
applied in the presence of a protein synthesis inhibitor [59].
Reconsolidation has also been studied using the gill- and
siphon-withdrawal reflex in the sea slug Aplysia, which
serves as a simple model of non-associative memory at both
the behavioral and synaptic levels [60–64]. The neuronal
circuitry mediating the withdrawal reflex is well charac-
terized and enables the measurement of changes in syn-
aptic strength in the circuit over long periods of time.
Facilitation of the sensory-to-motor neuron synapse re-
sponsible for the withdrawal reflex is rendered labile after
a second presentation of an induction stimulus, and can be
reversed through the inhibition of protein synthesis [60–
63]. Similarly to mammalian models, this reconsolidation
process is dependent on protein degradation [60]. Crucially,
a second induction stimuli alone does not cause further
potentiation of the facilitated synapse [60,62], or an in-
crease in the number of synaptic varicosities [63], in agree-
ment with the proposition that synaptic reconsolidation
maintains synaptic strength. Overall, these studies reveal
a consistent trend in which reactivation of the memory
trace fails to produce further synaptic potentiation,
Box
despite
2. Outstanding questions
(cid:2) Can the destabilization and reconsolidation processes activated
by memory recall be mechanistically separated?
(cid:2) Can the balance of depotentiation and repotentiation processes
be manipulated, such that unbalanced repotentiation leads to the
strengthening of the memory trace?
(cid:2) Are the boundary conditions for memory reconsolidation deter-
mined by the extent of synaptic activation (e.g., homosynaptic or
heterosynaptic) during recall?
(cid:2) Is reconsolidation observed throughout the CNS, beyond memory
and pain circuits?
0 120 240
200
150
100
50
360
)enilesab
%(
aera
PSPf
Time (min)
0 120 240
200
150
100
50
360
)enilesab
%(
aera
PSPf
X
0
Time (min)
120 240
200
150
100
50
360
Time (min)
)enilesab
%(
aera
PSPf
Aniso Aniso
TRENDS in Neurosciences
Figure 2. Synaptic reconsolidation outside classical learning pathways. A synaptic correlate of reconsolidation can be seen with an in vitro spinal cord preparation. Strong
electrical stimulation of dorsal roots (yellow bolts) induces a long-lasting enhancement of synaptic strength in the superficial dorsal horn, as indicated by the increase in
postsynaptic field potentials (fPSP). Delivery of a second stimulus, mimicking the reactivation of a memory trace, produces no net change in synaptic strength (black
symbols). However, when the second stimulus is given in the presence of the protein synthesis inhibitor, anisomycin (Aniso, blue rectangle), there is a robust reversal of the
synaptic potentiation (blue symbols). This parallels the disruption of memory or hyperalgesia seen when reconsolidation is inhibited. Importantly, in the absence of the
second stimulus, the protein synthesis inhibitor did not significantly affect synaptic strength (green symbols). Data modified from
Opinion
Trends
[9].
in Neurosciences June 2015, Vol. 38, No. 6
340
the induction of a protein synthesis-dependent process that
counters activity-dependent depotentiation.
The lack of further potentiation after the presentation
of a second induction stimulus could arise from a ceiling
effect in which further potentiation of synapses upon
recall is not possible. Nevertheless, there is evidence that
an inability to induce further synaptic potentiation in
reconsolidation experiments does not reflect synaptic sat-
uration. The long-term enhancement of both auditory-
evoked field potentials [57] and persistent synaptic facili-
tation in Aplysia [62] underwent additional augmentation
following the re-presentation of induction stimuli, al-
though in both cases this augmentation was transient
and did not persist over the long term. In addition, the
difficulties in dissociating the depotentiation and repo-
tentiation processes further complicate the study of satu-
ration in reconsolidation by preventing the selective
augmentation of memory traces through the inhibition
of depotentiation. In the absence of synaptic facilitation
upon recall, it is possible to envisage that the net effect of
opposing depotentiation and repotentiation processes
would be the recall-induced turnover of synaptic proteins.
Such a turnover process can be seen in the exchange of
synaptic AMPA receptors induced by memory recall
[23,38,65–68].
Changes in synaptic AMPA receptor composition in-
duced by memory recall have been captured through the
use of cross-sectional approaches that examine reactiva-
tion-induced changes in synaptic responses at various
timepoints [23,65]. Memory recall after fear conditioning
triggers a transient endocytosis of AMPA receptors that
can be observed within 5 minutes of memory recall [65],
and may last for up to 4 h [23]. Crucially, preventing AMPA
receptor endocytosis and exchange also prevented the
destabilization of memory upon recall [23,65]. Hong
et al. [65] observed an endocytosis of calcium-permeable,
GluA2-containing receptors that was paralleled by the
membrane insertion of calcium-impermeable AMPA recep-
tors. Notably, this exchange of AMPA receptors produced
no net change in miniature excitatory postsynaptic con-
ductance (mEPSCs), consistent with the lack of reactiva-
tion effect seen in previous electrophysiological studies
[9,44,60,62]. Conversely, Rao-Ruiz et al. [23] observed a
small but significant decrease in mEPSC amplitude 1 h
after recall, with restoration of mEPSC amplitude to con-
trol levels by 7 h post-recall, indicating that the increase in
calcium-impermeable AMPA receptors does not always
occur simultaneously with AMPA receptor endocytosis.
This brief decrease in synaptic strength is similar to that
observed through in vivo hippocampal recordings [58], and
suggests that transient synaptic depression induced by
recall may depend on a balance of AMPA receptor removal
and insertion that, for reasons unknown, can vary between
studies. However, this transient decrease in synaptic
strength is unlikely to be crucial for reconsolidation be-
cause memory was still rendered labile under conditions in
which the decrease was absent [65]. Finally, it must be
noted that preventing memory destabilization by inhibit-
ing AMPA receptor endocytosis does not necessarily pre-
vent reconsolidation. Blockade of AMPA receptor
endocytosis was associated with an enhancement of
memory
fear
that may reflect the modification of memory
through recall [23]; however, the enhancement of fear
memory following the inhibition of AMPA receptor endo-
cytosis associated with reconsolidation is not always ob-
served [65].
Functional significance of synaptic reconsolidation
The activation of a memory trace clearly induces changes
in synapse composition but, as summarized above, rarely
produces robust changes in synaptic strength. Such find-
ings support the view of synaptic reconsolidation as a
product of two opposing processes that largely cancel out
in overall effect. These observations raise the question of
why two opposing processes would be triggered through
the reactivation of a memory trace. Simultaneous depo-
tentiation and repotentiation processes could serve as a
means of limiting continual synaptic potentiation in
the face of ongoing synaptic activity. As such, synaptic
reconsolidation may function as one of several cellular
mechanisms that homeostatically maintain synaptic po-
tentiation within a functional range [69,70]. In the ab-
sence of these homeostatic mechanisms, the positive-
feedback nature of activity-dependent synaptic potentia-
tion can theoretically lead to synaptic saturation, run-
away excitation, and loss of network plasticity as activity
becomes increasingly concentrated within a select num-
ber of potentiated synapses [69,70]. Synaptic reconsoli-
dation would serve a unique role in the homeostatic
maintenance of neuronal activity and excitability because
depotentiation and repotentiation occur on a much
shorter timescale than most identified mechanisms of
homeostatic synaptic plasticity that are recruited in re-
sponse to changes in neuronal activity and occur over
hours to days [70]. Specifically, the mechanisms of syn-
aptic depotentiation can be induced almost immediately
after synaptic activity [65], making this process much
more temporally related to activity-dependent LTP and
long-term depression (LTD). In addition, the interpreta-
tion of reconsolidation as a property of synaptic plasticity
provides a consistent mechanism for the strengthening or
modification of memory seen behaviorally after recall
because these outcomes would be enabled through the
‘window’ of plasticity at the cellular and network levels
provided by synaptic depotentiation and repotentiation.
The relative balance of synaptic potentiation and depo-
tentiation triggered by synaptic activity may further
determine the overall impact of synaptic reconsolidation
on synaptic strength and modification of the memory
trace, although evidence for such a regulated balance is
currently lacking (Box 2).
The putative homeostatic function of synaptic reconso-
lidation has parallels with the Bienenstock–Cooper–
Munro (BCM) model of synaptic metaplasticity, in which
the threshold for the induction of LTP or LTD is dependent
on the prior activity of the relevant synapses [71]. In the
BCM model, a high level of synaptic activity shifts the
threshold for the induction of long-term plasticity such that
subsequent activity is less likely to produce synaptic po-
tentiation, and may even induce synaptic depotentiation.
In a similar manner, a second presentation of strong
stimuli as may occur during recall does not
Opinion Trends
necessarily
in Neurosciences June 2015, Vol. 38, No. 6
341
produce further strengthening of a previously-potentiated
synapse owing to the activation of a depotentiation process
in synaptic reconsolidation.
The net effects of synaptic reconsolidation on network
activity and learning will depend on the precise mecha-
nisms underlying synaptic depotentiation and repotentia-
tion, and how broadly these mechanisms impact upon
neuronal function. Intriguingly, a recent study in Aplysia
found that reconsolidation was triggered only by stimuli
that generate heterosynaptic but not homosynaptic plas-
ticity (Figure 3A–C) [62]. In this study, persistently facili-
tated synapses were reactivated with either electrical
stimulation that normally induces transient homosynap-
tic potentiation, or by serotonin application that tran-
siently facilitates many synapses (heterosynaptic
potentiation). While electrical stimulation failed to induce
synaptic depotentiation in the presence of the translation
inhibitor, rapamycin, depotentiation was induced by the
combination of serotonin stimulation and rapamycin. The
observation that heterosynaptic facilitation is required for
reconsolidation in Aplysia [62] may be relevant to behav-
ioral observations where reconsolidation is only triggered
by specific conditions, such as novelty [18,19] or prediction
error [72] during recall. Specifically, these observations
raise the questions of whether the boundary conditions
memory
for
reconsolidation are determined by the extent of
synaptic activation during recall, and whether memory
reconsolidation requires behavioral stimuli that activate
heterosynaptic plasticity (Figure 3D and Box 2). In a
similar vein, the use of ‘weak’ reactivation protocols in
vitro and in vivo was not sufficient to render memory
traces labile [61,63,73,74], suggesting that reconsolida-
tion requires strong reactivation of the facilitated memory
traces.
It is also unknown whether the processes of synaptic
potentiation and depotentiation are restricted to a subset
of synapses, such as those synapses that have undergone
some degree of potentiation or were directly activated by
reactivation of the memory trace, or whether the mecha-
nisms of synaptic reconsolidation globally affect synaptic
strength in the neuron. There is compelling evidence that
activity-dependent synaptic depotentiation can occur on a
local scale. The selective activation of a subset of AMPA-
containing synapses led to the removal and proteasome-
dependent degradation of AMPA receptors exclusively at
activated synapses, without affecting neighboring synap-
ses [75]. Determining whether synaptic reconsolidation is
constrained by a similar synaptic selectivity will have
important implications for its effects on information stor-
age and processing [69,70].
(A)
Poten(cid:2)a(cid:2)on
No effect
Synap(cid:2)c
reconsolida(cid:2)on
? ?
(D)
Stored
memory
Destabiliza(cid:2)on
(B)
Homosynap(cid:2)c reac(cid:2)va(cid:2)on
(C)
Heterosynap(cid:2)c reac(cid:2)va(cid:2)on
Homosynap(cid:2)c
No effect
ac(cid:2)va(cid:2)on?
Recall
and Heterosynap(cid:2)c
reconsolida(cid:2)on ac(cid:2)va(cid:2)on?
TRENDS in Neurosciences
Figure 3. Synaptic reconsolidation induced by heterosynaptic activity. The reactivation of facilitated synapses does not always induce synaptic reconsolidation, similarly to
observations that memory recall does not always lead to behavioral reconsolidation. In Aplysia, reconsolidation was triggered only by stimuli that generate heterosynaptic
but not homosynaptic plasticity [62]. (A) The initial stimulation of a synapse can induce long-lasting synaptic potentiation. (B) The reactivation of the potentiated synapse
alone (homosynaptic activation) does not necessarily trigger synaptic reconsolidation. (C) Reactivation of several synapses, including the potentiated synapses
(heterosynaptic activation), can trigger the depotentiation and repotentiation processes of synaptic reconsolidation. However, the net effect of reactivation stimuli on
unpotentiated synapses is unknown. (D) The putative requirement of heterosynaptic activation for synaptic reconsolidation may underlie observations that recall does not
always trigger memory reconsolidation – the behavioral stimuli that fail to trigger memory reconsolidation may not cause sufficient synaptic
Opinion
Trends
activation.
in Neurosciences June 2015, Vol. 38, No. 6
342
Concluding remarks
The interpretation of reconsolidation as a fundamental
property of plasticity greatly expands the relevance of this
process to overall CNS function. Reconsolidation has al-
ready been observed to occur in a wide variety of learning
tasks [3,5], while the demonstration that reconsolidation
exists in spinal pain-processing networks reveals a role for
reconsolidation in sensory function [9]. We anticipate that,
similarly to LTP, which was originally described in memo-
ry circuits, reconsolidation will continue to be observed in
increasingly diverse CNS regions and cognitive functions,
reflecting its fundamental regulatory role in plasticity.
Acknowledgments
We thank Jimena Perez-Sanchez for her assistance with figures. This
work was supported by a Pfizer–Fonds de Recherche Que´bec–Sante´
(FRQS) Innovation Fund Award to Y.D.K., a Canadian Institutes of
Health Research grant (MOP 12942) to Y.D.K., and a Catherine Bushnell
Pain Research Fellowship from the Louise and Alan Edwards Foundation
to R.P.B.
References
1 Nader, K. et al. (2000) Fear memories require protein synthesis in the
amygdala for reconsolidation after retrieval. Nature 406, 722–726
2 Finnie, P.S. and Nader, K. (2012) The role of metaplasticity
mechanisms in regulating memory destabilization and
reconsolidation. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 36, 1667–1707
3 Besnard, A. et al. (2012) Reconsolidation of memory: a decade of debate.
Prog. Neurobiol. 99, 61–80
4 Dudai, Y. (2012) The restless engram: consolidations never end. Annu.
Rev. Neurosci. 35, 227–247
5 Almeida-Correa, S. and Amaral, O.B. (2014) Memory labilization in
reconsolidation and extinction – evidence for a common plasticity
system? J. Physiol. 108, 292–306
6 Kroes, M.C. and Fernandez, G. (2012) Dynamic neural systems enable
adaptive, flexible memories. Neurosci. Biobehav. Revs. 36, 1646–1666
7 Forcato, C. et al. (2014) Strengthening a consolidated memory: the key
role of the reconsolidation process. J. Physiol. 108, 323–333
8 Alberini, C.M. and Ledoux, J.E. (2013) Memory reconsolidation. Curr.
Biol. 23, 746–750
9 Bonin, R.P. and De Koninck, Y. (2014) A spinal analog of memory
reconsolidation enables reversal of hyperalgesia. Nat. Neurosci. 17,
1043–1045
10 Lee, J.L. (2009) Reconsolidation: maintaining memory relevance.
Trends Neurosci. 32, 413–420
11 Hupbach, A. et al. (2007) Reconsolidation of episodic memories: a subtle
reminder triggers integration of new information. Learn. Mem. 14,
47–53
12 Forcato, C. et al. (2010) Reconsolidation in humans opens up
declarative memory to the entrance of new information. Neurobiol.
Learn. Mem. 93, 77–84
13 Lee, J.L. (2008) Memory reconsolidation mediates the strengthening of
memories by additional learning. Nat. Neurosci. 11, 1264–1266
14 Haubrich, J. et al. (2015) Reconsolidation allows fear memory to be
updated to a less aversive level through the incorporation of appetitive
information. Neuropsychopharmacology 40, 315–326
15 De Oliveira Alvares, L. et al. (2013) Reactivation enables memory
updating, precision-keeping and strengthening: Exploring the
possible biological roles of reconsolidation. Neuroscience 244,
42–48
16 Olshavsky, M.E. et al. (2013) Updating appetitive memory during
reconsolidation window: critical role of cue-directed behavior and
amygdala central nucleus. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 7, 186
17 Exton-McGuinness, M.T. et al. (2014) Updating memories – the role of
prediction errors in memory reconsolidation. Behav. Brain Res. 278,
375–384
18 Winters, B.D. et al. (2009) Older and stronger object memories are
selectively destabilized by reactivation in the presence of new
information. Learn. Mem. 16,
19
545–553
Lee, J.L. (2010) Memory reconsolidation mediates the updating of
hippocampal memory content. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 4, 168
20 de Oliveira Alvares, L. et al. (2008) Opposite action of hippocampal cb1
receptors in memory reconsolidation and extinction. Neuroscience 154,
1648–1655
21 Fukushima, H. et al. (2014) Enhancement of fear memory by retrieval
through reconsolidation. Elife 3, e02736
22 Inda, M.C. et al. (2011) Memory retrieval and the passage of time:
from reconsolidation and strengthening to extinction. J. Neurosci. 31,
1635–1643
23 Rao-Ruiz, P. et al. (2011) Retrieval-specific endocytosis of GluA2-
AMPARs underlies adaptive reconsolidation of contextual fear. Nat.
Neurosci. 14, 1302–1308
24 Tronson, N.C. et al. (2006) Bidirectional behavioral plasticity of
memory reconsolidation depends on amygdalar protein kinase A.
Nat. Neurosci. 9, 167–169
25 Lee, J.L. et al. (2006) Reconsolidation and extinction of conditioned
fear: Inhibition and potentiation. J. Neurosci. 26, 10051–10056
26 Latremoliere, A. and Woolf, C.J. (2009) Central sensitization: a
generator of pain hypersensitivity by central neural plasticity. J.
Pain 10, 895–926
27 Sandkuhler, J. and Lee, J. (2013) How to erase memory traces of pain
and fear. Trends Neurosci. 36, 343–352
28 Ruscheweyh, R. et al. (2011) Long-term potentiation in spinal
nociceptive pathways as a novel target for pain therapy. Mol. Pain
7, 20
29 Drdla-Schutting, R. et al. (2012) Erasure of a spinal memory trace of
pain by a brief, high-dose opioid administration. Science 335, 235–238
30 Asiedu, M.N. et al. (2011) Spinal protein kinase Mz underlies the
maintenance mechanism of persistent nociceptive sensitization. J.
Neurosci. 31, 6646–6653
31 Nader, K. and Hardt, O. (2009) A single standard for memory: the case
for reconsolidation. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10, 224–234
32 Kaang, B.K. et al. (2009) Synaptic protein degradation as a mechanism
in memory reorganization. Neuroscientist 15, 430–435
33 Sol Fustinana, M. et al. (2014) Protein degradation by ubiquitin–
proteasome system in formation and labilization of contextual
conditioning memory. Learn. Mem. 21, 478–487
34 Da Silva, W.C. et al. (2013) Memory reconsolidation and its
maintenance depend on L-voltage-dependent calcium channels and
CaMKII functions regulating protein turnover in the hippocampus.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110, 6566–6570
35 Milton, A.L. et al. (2013) Double dissociation of the requirement for
GluN2B- and GluN2A-containing NMDA receptors in the
destabilization and restabilization of a reconsolidating memory. J.
Neurosci. 33, 1109–1115
36 Jarome, T.J. et al. (2011) Activity dependent protein degradation is
critical for the formation and stability of fear memory in the amygdala.
PLoS ONE 6, e24349
37 Lee, S.H. et al. (2008) Synaptic protein degradation underlies
destabilization of retrieved fear memory. Science 319, 1253–1256
38 Ren, Z-Y. et al. (2013) A critical role for protein degradation in the
nucleus accumbens core in cocaine reward memory.
Neuropsychopharmacology 38, 778–790
39 Hegde, A.N. et al. (2014) Local ubiquitin–proteasome-mediated
proteolysis and long-term synaptic plasticity. Front. Mol. Neurosci.
7, 96
40 Arguello, A.A. et al. (2014) Involvement of amygdalar protein kinase A,
but not calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II, in the
reconsolidation of cocaine-related contextual memories in rats.
Psychopharmacology 231, 55–65
41 Bonini, J.S. et al. (2007) On the participation of hippocampal PKC in
acquisition, consolidation and reconsolidation of spatial memory.
Neuroscience 147, 37–45
42 Wells, A.M. et al. (2013) Extracellular signal-regulated kinase in
the basolateral amygdala, but not the nucleus accumbens core, is
critical for context-response-cocaine memory reconsolidation in rats.
Neuropsychopharmacology 38, 753–762
43 Duvarci, S. et al. (2005) Activation of extracellular signal-regulated
kinase- mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade in the amygdala is
required for memory reconsolidation of auditory fear conditioning. Eur.
J. Neurosci. 21,
Opinion Trends
283–289
in Neurosciences June 2015, Vol. 38, No. 6
343
44 Li, Y. et al. (2013) Learning and reconsolidation implicate different
synaptic mechanisms. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110, 4798–4803
45 Stoica, L. et al. (2011) Selective pharmacogenetic inhibition of
mammalian target of rapamycin complex I (mTORC1) blocks long-
term synaptic plasticity and memory storage. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 108, 3791–3796
46 Tronson, N.C. et al. (2012) Distinctive roles for amygdalar creb in
reconsolidation and extinction of fear memory. Learn. Mem. 19, 178–181
47 Arguello, A.A. et al. (2013) CAAT enhancer binding protein delta plays
an essential role in memory consolidation and reconsolidation. J.
Neurosci. 33, 3646–3658
48 Boccia, M. et al. (2007) Activation of hippocampal nuclear factor-kappa
B by retrieval is required for memory reconsolidation. J. Neurosci. 27,
13436–13445
49 Merlo, E. et al. (2005) Activation of the transcription factor NF-kappaB
by retrieval is required for long-term memory reconsolidation. Learn.
Mem. 12, 23–29
50 Ploski, J.E. et al. (2011) The neuronal PAS domain protein 4 (Npas4) is
required for new and reactivated fear memories. PLoS ONE 6, e23760
51 Duvarci, S. et al. (2008) De novo mRNA synthesis is required for both
consolidation and reconsolidation of fear memories in the amygdala.
Learn. Mem. 15, 747–755
52 Jarome, T.J. and Helmstetter, F.J. (2013) The ubiquitin–proteasome
system as a critical regulator of synaptic plasticity and long-term
memory formation. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 105, 107–116
53 Flavell, C.R. et al. (2013) Mechanisms governing the reactivation-
dependent destabilization of memories and their role in extinction.
Front. Behav. Neurosci. 7, 214
54 Artinian, J. et al. (2008) Protein degradation, as with protein synthesis,
is required during not only long-term spatial memory consolidation but
also reconsolidation. Eur. J. Neurosci. 27, 3009–3019
55 Lopez-Salon, M. et al. (2001) The ubiquitin–proteasome cascade is
required for mammalian long-term memory formation. Eur. J.
Neurosci. 14, 1820–1826
56 Fonseca, R. et al. (2006) A balance of protein synthesis and proteasome-
dependent degradation determines the maintenance of LTP. Neuron
52, 239–245
57 Doyere, V. et al. (2007) Synapse-specific reconsolidation of distinct fear
memories in the lateral amygdala. Nat. Neurosci. 10, 414–416
58 Clarke, J.R. et al. (2010) Plastic modifications induced by object
recognition memory processing. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107,
2652–2657
59 Fonseca, R. et al. (2006) Neuronal activity determines the protein
synthesis dependence of long-term potentiation. Nat. Neurosci. 9,
478–480
60 Lee, S.H. et al. (2012) A cellular model of memory reconsolidation
involves reactivation-induced destabilization and restabilization at the
sensorimotor synapse in Aplysia. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109,
14200–14205
61 Hu, J.Y. et al. (2011) Persistent long-term synaptic plasticity requires
activation of a new signaling pathway by additional stimuli. J.
Neurosci. 31,
62
8841–8850
Hu, J.Y. and Schacher, S. (2014) Persistent long-term facilitation at an
identified synapse becomes labile with activation of short-term
heterosynaptic plasticity. J. Neurosci. 34, 4776–4785
63 Chen, S. et al. (2014) Reinstatement of long-term memory following
erasure of its behavioral and synaptic expression in Aplysia. Elife 3,
e03896
64 Cai, D. et al. (2012) Reconsolidation of long-term memory in Aplysia.
Curr. Biol. 22, 1783–1788
65 Hong, I. et al. (2013) AMPA receptor exchange underlies transient
memory destabilization on retrieval. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110,
8218–8223
66 Yu, Y-J. et al. (2013) Ampa receptor endocytosis in the amygdala is
involved in the disrupted reconsolidation of methamphetamine-
associated contextual memory. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 103, 72–81
67 Descalzi, G. et al. (2012) Rapid synaptic potentiation within the
anterior cingulate cortex mediates trace fear learning. Mol. Brain 5, 6
68 Clem, R.L. and Huganir, R.L. (2010) Calcium-permeable AMPA
receptor dynamics mediate fear memory erasure. Science 330,
1108–1112
69 Turrigiano, G. (2012) Homeostatic synaptic plasticity: local and global
mechanisms for stabilizing neuronal function. Cold Spring Harb.
Perspect. Biol. 4, a005736
70 Lee, K.F. et al. (2014) Tuning into diversity of homeostatic synaptic
plasticity. Neuropharmacology 78, 31–37
71 Cooper, L.N. and Bear, M.F. (2012) The BCM theory of synapse
modification at 30: interaction of theory with experiment. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 13, 798–810
72 Sevenster, D. et al. (2013) Prediction error governs pharmacologically
induced amnesia for learned fear. Science 339, 830–833
73 Rodriguez-Ortiz, C.J. et al. (2008) Intrahippocampal anisomycin
infusions disrupt previously consolidated spatial memory only when
memory is updated. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 89, 352–359
74 Morris, R.G. et al. (2006) Memory reconsolidation: sensitivity of spatial
memory to inhibition of protein synthesis in dorsal hippocampus
during encoding and retrieval. Neuron 50, 479–489
75 Hou, Q. et al. (2011) Homeostatic regulation of AMPA receptor
trafficking and degradation by light-controlled single-synaptic
activation. Neuron 72, 806–818
76 Dong, C. et al. (2008) Proteasome inhibition enhances the induction
and impairs the maintenance of late-phase long-term potentiation.
Learn. Mem. 15, 335–347
77 Dong, C. et al. (2014) Proteasome modulates positive and negative
translational regulators in long-term synaptic plasticity. J. Neurosci.
34, 3171–3182
78 Banerjee, S. et al. (2009) A coordinated local translational control point
at the synapse involving relief from silencing and MOV10 degradation.
Neuron 64, 871–884
79 Greer, P.L. et al. (2010) The Angelman syndrome protein Ube3A
regulates synapse development by ubiquitinating Arc. Cell 140,
704–716
80 Mabb, A.M. et al. (2014) Triad3A regulates synaptic strength by
ubiquitination of Arc. Neuron 82,
Opinion
Trends
1299–1316
in Neurosciences June 2015, Vol. 38, No. 6
344