Original Article
MolecularPain
Volume12:1–11
Epidural optogenetics for !TheAuthor(s)2016
Reprintsandpermissions:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
controlled analgesia
DOI:10.1177/1744806916629051
mpx.sagepub.com
Robert P Bonin, PhD1, Feng Wang, PhD1, Mireille Desrochers-
Couture1, Alicja Ga¸secka, PhD2, Marie-Eve Boulanger1,
Daniel C Coˆte´, PhD2 and Yves De Koninck, PhD1,3
Abstract
Background: Optogenetic tools enable cell selectiveand temporally precisecontrolof neuronal activity; yet,difficulties in
deliveringsufficientlighttothespinalcordoffreelybehavinganimalshavehamperedtheuseofspinaloptogeneticapproaches
to produce analgesia. We describe an epidural optic fiber designed forchronic spinal optogenetics that enables the precise
delivery of light at multiple wavelengths to the spinal cord dorsal horn and sensory afferents.
Results:Theepiduraldeliveryoflightenabledtheoptogeneticmodulationofnociceptiveprocessesatthespinallevel.The
acuteandrepeatedactivationofchannelrhodopsin-2 expressingnociceptiveafferentsproducedrobustnocifensivebehavior
and mechanical sensitization in freely behaving mice, respectively. The optogenetic inhibition of GABAergic interneurons in
the spinal cord dorsal horn through the activation of archaerhodopsin also produced a transient, but selective induction of
mechanicalhypersensitivity.Finally,wedemonstratethecapacityofoptogeneticstoproduceanalgesiainfreelybehavingmice
through the inhibition of nociceptive afferents via archaerhodopsin.
Conclusion:Epiduraloptogeneticsprovidesarobustandpowerfulsolutionforactivationofbothexcitatoryandinhibitory
opsins in sensory processing pathways. Our results demonstrate the potential of spinal optogenetics to modulate sensory
behavior and produce analgesia in freely behaving animals.
Keywords
Optogenetics, pain, analgesia, spinal cord, dorsal horn, plasticity, optics, allodynia, hyperalgesia
Datereceived:2October2015;accepted:18November2015
Optogenetic toolsoffer apowerful means forthecell-
Introduction
specific,functionaldissectionandmodulationofsensory
Noxious and innocuous sensation is largely mediated circuits. Optogenetic proteins have previously been
through the transmission of sensory information from expressed in genetically5 and biologically defined6 sen-
the periphery to the spinal cord via modality-specific sory afferent populations to study nociception induced
sensory afferents.1 The precise nature of sensation is by peripheral optical stimulation. In vitro studies have
dependent not only on the pattern of sensory afferents also employed optogenetics to explore sensory and
activated peripherally but also on how this input is pro-
cessed and integrated in the spinal cord.2 Abnormalities
1InstitutUniversitaireensante´ mentaledeQue´bec,Que´bec,Canada
in either afferent or dorsal horn interneuronal activity
2DepartmentofPhysics,Universite´ Laval,Que´bec,Canada
can lead to pathological sensory conditions, including 3Department of Psychiatry and Neuroscience, Universite´ Laval, Que´bec,
chronic pain.2–4 Deciphering how sensory information Canada
is relayed through the spinal cord from the periphery
and how this process changes in pathological conditions Correspondingauthor:
YvesDeKoninck,DivisionofCellularandMolecularNeuroscience,Institut
is crucial for the development of novel therapeutic
UniversitaireensantementaledeQue´bec2601,ChemindelaCanardiere
approaches that treat the root causes of sensory
Que´bec,QC,G1J2G3Canada.
dysfunction. Email:yves.dekoninck@neuro.ulaval.ca
CreativeCommonsNonCommercialCC-BY-NC:This articleisdistributedunderthetermsoftheCreativeCommonsAttribution-
NonCommercial3.0License(http://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/)whichpermitsnon-commercialuse,reproductionand
distributionofthework withoutfurtherpermissionprovidedtheoriginalworkisattributedasspecifiedontheSAGEandOpenAccesspages(https://
us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).
2 Molecular Pain 0(0)
motor circuitry of the spinal cord.7–11 However, the dif- Council for Animal Care. Adult (>12 weeks old) male
ficulty in delivering light to the spinal cord of freely C57BL/6 mice were used for experiments except where
behaving animals has hindered the optogenetic study of indicatedotherwise.Micewerekeptona12:12light:dark
howspinalprocessingmodulatesbehavioralresponsesto cycleingroupsofonetofourmicepercagepriortofiber
sensory input. implantation, and singly housed after implantation of
Recently, a subcutaneous, wireless light-emitting the fiber, with food and water provided ad libitum. All
diode (LED) system was described that could activate experiments started prior to 10:00.
channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2) expressing sensory afferents Optogenetic mouse models were generated using
either peripherally or at thespinal level.12 This advance- three different approaches to highlight a number of
ment enabled the manipulation of sensory afferents in applications of the epidural optic fiber (see Table 1).
awake mice. Yet, it is unclear whether this LED Mice expressing ChR2 in Na 1.8+ nociceptive afferents
v
approachcandeliversufficientlyintenselightfortheacti- (Na 1.8-ChR2)weregeneratedbycrossingmiceexpress-
v
vationofinhibitoryoptogeneticproteinssuchasarchae- ing Cre-recombinase in Na 1.8+ neurons (Na 1.8-Cre;
v v
rhodopsin (ArchT) that have a higher threshold for generously provided by Rohini Kuner)13 with mice
activation than channelrhodopsin, or for the activation expressing a loxP-flanked STOP cassette upstream of
or inhibition of neurons within sensory processing path- a ChR2-EYFP fusion gene at the Rosa 26 locus
ways of the spinal cord dorsal horn that lie beneath a (Rosa-CAG-LSL-ChR2(H134R)-EYFP-WPRE; stock
layer of myelin. The inhibition of nociceptive afferents number 012569, The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor,
via activation of ArchT or manipulation of intrinsic ME). In these mice, Cre expression is restricted to the
spinal neuron activity to inhibit the activity of nocicep- dorsal root ganglia, and the vast majority (>90%) of
tive projection neurons would enable optogenetic induc- Cre-expressing cells are unmyelinated C-fibers that
tionofanalgesia—oneofthekeytherapeuticpossibilities innervate the superficial dorsal horn (Figure 1(a) and
enabled by spinal cord optogenetics. (b)).13,14 Mice expressing ArchT in Na 1.8+ nociceptive
v
To overcomethiskey obstacle,we havedeveloped an afferents were generated by intraperitoneal injection of
effective epidural optic fiber implant for mice that is neonatal (P5) Na 1.8-Cre mouse pups with 20 ml of
v
entirely compatible with conventional LED or laser- AAV8 virus Cre-dependently expressing ArchT
based optogenetic systems, and that enables the spinal (AAV8-CBA-Flex-ArchT-GFP-WPRE-SV40, >1013
delivery of light in acute and chronic experiments. This particles(cid:2)ml(cid:3)1, University of North Carolina). We con-
approach offers the advantages of permitting delivery of firmed that this technique efficiently transfects dorsal
multiplewavelengthsoflightfortheactivationofthecom- root ganglia neurons while sparing the spinal cord
pletepaletteofoptogeneticproteins,aswellasthedelivery dorsalhornbyinjectingneonatalmousepups(P5)intra-
of sufficient light intensity for activating or inhibiting peritoneally with with Cre-independent
intrinsic spinal cordneurons insensory processing path- AAV9 expressing GCaMP (AAV9, CAG-GCaMP6s-
ways. We used this easily constructed and readily WPRE-SV40, >1013 particles(cid:2)ml(cid:3)1, University of
employeddesigntoinducemechanicalhyperalgesiaaris- Pennsylvania), after which we observed no transfection of
ingfromsensoryplasticityanddorsalhorndisinhibition, spinalcordneurons(Figure1(c)and(d)).15Miceexpressing
andtheimmediateandacuteinductionofanalgesia. ArchT in spinal cord inhibitory interneurons were gener-
ated by intraspinal injection of AAV8 virus Cre-depen-
dently expressing ArchT into adult (eight weeks) male
Methods GAD2-IRES-Cre mice (Stock number 010802, The
Jackson Laboratory). Briefly, adult mice
Animals
were anesthetized with 2.5% to 3% isoflurane and L3
All behavioral experiments were conducted in accord- through L5 spinal cord was exposed by laminectomy;
ance with the guidelines established by the Canadian 500 nl of AAV8-CBA-Flex-ArchT-GFP-WPRE-SV40
Table 1. Summaryofoptogenetic models andapproachesused.
Mousemodel Method ofgeneration Method oflight delivery Figure
Na1.8-ChR2 Na1.8-Cre(cid:4)FloxedChR2 Epidural inawake 4b,c,f
v v
Na1.8-ChR2 Na1.8-Cre(cid:4)FloxedChR2 Peripheral under anesthesia 4d
v v
Na1.8-ChR2 Na1.8-Cre(cid:4)FloxedChR2 Epidural under anesthesia 4e
v v
GAD2-ArchT Intraspinal AAVin GAD2-Cre Epidural inawake 4h,i
Na1.8-ArchT I.P.AAV(neonates) in Na1.8-Cre Epidural inawake 4k
v v
C57BL/6 None Epidural inawake 4l
Bonin et al. 3
Figure 1. Characterization ofoptogenetic mouse models used. (a,b) Spinalexpression ofChR2-YFP in Na1.8-ChR2mice.ChR2-YFP
v
doesnotcolocalizewithNeuN(a),andispredominantlypresentinthesuperficialdorsalhorn(b),consistentwithitsrestrictedexpression
inNa1.8+sensoryafferents.(c,d)ExpressionofGCamP6asacellularmarkerinsuperficialdorsalhornanddorsalrootganglianeurons
v
aftersystemictransfectionofneonatalmousepupswithGCamP6-expressingAAV9administeredviai.p.injection.GCaMP6expressionis
restrictedtoafferentterminalsenteringthespinalcorddorsalhorn(c)andneuronsoftheDRG(d),indicatingtherouteofAAV9virus-
administrationdoesnottransfectintrinsicdorsalhornneurons.(e)ExpressionofArchT-YFPinGAD65/67+neuronsofthedorsalhorn
afterintraspinalinjectionofCre-dependentAAV9expressingArchT-YFPinGAD2-Cremice.(f)TheexpressionofArchT-YFPwaslargely
restrictedtothesuperficialdorsalhornofintraspinallyinjectedGAD2-Cremice.Scalebarsofa,b,c,andfindicate100mm.Scalebarsofd,
e indicate50mm.
(>1013 particles(cid:2)ml(cid:3)1, University of North Carolina) were
Epidural fiber production and implantation
pressure ejected into the spinal parenchyma at a depth of
100mm via a glass pipette connected to a nanoinjector The epidural optic fiber implant consisted of a length of
(Micro 4, World Precision Instruments, Florida, USA) at multimode plastic fiber (240mm core, 250mm diameter
a rate of 100nl(cid:2)min(cid:3)1. The injection was carried out four with cladding, 0.62NA) modified with a diffusive tip
times bilaterally (two times on each side) on each mouse. (Doric Lenses, Quebec, Canada) to enable multidirec-
The expression of ArchT was restricted to the superficial tional diffusion of light from the fiber (Figure 2(a)
dorsal horn and overlapped with GAD65/67 expression and(b);Figure3(a)).Thefiberwasfittedwithaceramic
(Figure 1(e) and (f)). Mice were allowed to recover from ferrule (2.5mm diameter, 270mm bore; Thor Labs,
intraspinal injection for four weeks prior to epidural fiber Germany) and the length of the fiber from the end of
implantation. the ferrule to the diffusive tip was typically 40mm, but
4 Molecular Pain 0(0)
Figure 2. Development andcharacterization of anepidural opticfiberimplant. (a)The epiduraloptic fiberimplantconsists ofabare
ferrule(1)embeddedinapreformeddentalcementbasethatfacilitatesfixationtotheskull(2).Theopticfiber(3)connectedtotheferrule
isahigh-aperture,large-diametercore(240mm)plasticfibermodifiedwithadiffusivetip(4)toenableilluminationofthespinalcordventral
tothefibertip.Theopticfiberisepidurallyimplantedinamouseandconnectedtoafiber-coupledlaserviaalight-weightsleeve.(b)Image
ofanepiduralopticfiberbeforeimplantation.Scalebarindicates1cm.(c)Imageofamouseimmediatelyafterimplantationsurgerywith
epidural opticfiberconnected directlyto agreenlightsource(not to anexperiment patch cable) toverifypositioning ofthefiber tip.
(d)Estimationofpoweroutputfromthediffusivetipoftheopticfiberrequiredforactivationofopsinsinthespinalcorddorsalhornusing
athresholdof activation (EC )of 0.3mW(cid:2)mm(cid:3)2and0.75mW(cid:2)mm(cid:3)2forChR2andArchT, respectively.(e) Motorperformance of
20
epidural fiber-implantedandcontrol miceintheRotaRod task.n¼6 micepergroup.(f) Distancemeasurement andactivityanalysis of
implanted andnon-implanted miceplaced innovelcage for1h. n¼6 micepergroup.
varied from 38mm to 42mm for implantation in longer The head and neck of the mice were shaved and a 1.5-
or shorter mice, as necessary. A 5mm diameter base of cm incision was made from the first vertebrae to the
dentalcementwasaddedtotheferrule priortoimplant- skull. The dorsal neck muscles were separated at mid-
ation to facilitate fixation on the skull of the mouse. line and retracted with the head held at a downward
Mice were anesthetized with isoflurane (2% to 2.5%) angle (approximately 45(cid:5) from parallel) to expose the
delivered by a flexible tube fitted with a latex nose cone posterior atlanto-occipital membrane. The atlanto-occi-
to enable to manipulation of mouse during the surgery. pital membrane was vigorously, mechanically cleaned
Bonin et al. 5
Figure 3. Activationofopsinsexpressedbysensoryafferentsandneuronsofthespinalcorddorsalhornwithadiffusive-tippedepidural
opticfiber.(a)Adiffusive-tippedopticfiberwasusedtoensuretheventrallytransmissionoflighttowardsthedorsalhorn.Demonstration
oflightemissionfromadiffusive-tippedfiber(left)comparedtoastandard,non-diffusive-tippedfiber(right),showingawideangleoflight
emission from diffusive tip.Both fiberswereimmersed in afluorescentFITC solution andinjected with blue(473nm)light. Scale bar
indicates 250mm.(b) Measurementof lighttransmission throughvarious thicknessesof spinalcordmyelin.(c)Schematic drawingof the
modelusedforestimationofthepoweroutputfromthediffusivetipoftheopticfiberrequiredforactivationofopsinsinthespinalcord
dorsalhorn (seeMethods).
with a cotton swab with particular attention paid to the allowed to recover from surgery for at least one week
point of connection to the first vertebrae (C1). This prior to experimentation.
cleaning procedure does not perforate the membrane
and promotes separation of the atlanto-occipital mem-
Immunohistochemistry
brane from the dura to facilitate the epidural placement
of the optic fiber. The optic fiber was carefully inserted For immunohistochemistry, mice were anesthetized with
through the atlanto-occipital membrane and under C1, ketamine/xylazineandtranscardiallyperfusedwith4%w/
immediately rostral to C1, with the head held at an v paraformaldehyde and 0.1% v/v picric acid in phos-
acute, downward angle. Correct insertion was asso- phate buffer. The spinal cord was dissected and post-
ciated with a lack of cerebrospinal fluid loss at the fixed for 2h. Notably, no gross deformation or damage
site of insertion. With the head maintained at an caused by the epidural optic fiber was observed upon
acute angle and the body of the mouse suspended off spinal cord extraction for immunohistochemistry. The
the surgical table, the fiber was carefully inserted along tissue was cryo-protected in 30% sucrose solution over-
the length of the spinal cord. The mouse was repos- nightandthensectionedbyacryostatat14mmthickness.
itioned as necessary to straighten the natural curvature The sections were stained with rabbit antibodies against
of the spine during implantation. The correct position- CGRP(1:2000;C8198,SigmaAldrich),mouseanti-NeuN
ing of the fiber tip near L1 (corresponding to spinal antibodies (1:800; MAB377, Chemicon), or rabbit anti-
segments L4 through L616) was confirmed by connect- GAD65/67 antibodies (1:200; AB1511, Millipore), fol-
ing the fiber to a light source and observing the illumi- lowed by incubation with Alexa Fluor 543-conjugated
nated region on the back (Figure 2(c)). Once the fiber goat secondary anti-rabbit antibodies (1:100; Molecular
was correctly positioned, the skull of the mouse was Probes) or Alexa Fluor 647-conjugated goat secondary
cleaned with a small quantity of 30% H O (Sigma anti-mouse antibodies (1:100; Molecular Probes).
2 2
Aldrich, Canada), rinsed thoroughly with saline, and Sections were examined under an Olympus Fluoview
blotted dry. The dental cement base of the fiber was FV1000 confocal laser scanning microscope.
fixed to the skull with Loctite 454 Prism instant adhe-
sive and the incision sutured closed. The implanted
Physical model of spinal cord irradiance
mice were allowed to recover from anesthesia and the
animals were monitored to ensure a lack of paralysis or Myelinated spinal cord slices were obtained from adult
movement abnormalities indicative of improper fiber male C57BL/6 mice. Mice were anesthetized with ureth-
placement before being housed in a standard home ane (2g(cid:2)kg(cid:3)1) and perfused with ice-cold artificial cere-
cage without environmental enrichment. Mice were bralspinalfluid(aCSF;compositioninmM:124NaCl,3
6 Molecular Pain 0(0)
KCl,1.3MgCl,2.6CaCl ,1.25NaH PO ,26NaHCO , software (Toptica Inc). The intensity of the 592nm
2 2 4 3
10 D-glucose; oxygenated with 95% O , 5% CO ). The laser (VFL-P-300-592, MPB Technologies, Montreal,
2 2
lumbarspinalcolumnwasremovedandimmersedinice- Canada) used for activation of ArchT was controlled
cold sucrose aCSF after which the whole lumbar spinal with MPB VFL laser software and light delivery
cordwasquicklyremovedvialaminectomy.Parasagittal was regulated with a custom-made, TTL-controlled
slices were cut at varying thicknesses that excluded gray acousto-optic modulator (Doric Lenses Inc., Quebec,
matterandcontainedonlymyelinfromthelateralsideof Canada). Attenuation of the 592nm laser output below
thespinalcord.SlicesweremaintainedinaCSFatroom 30mW was achieved with an in-line, custom-made neu-
temperature (21–23(cid:5)C) until imaging. tral density filter box (Doric Lenses). All laser output
The transmission of light through the myelinated intensities reported refer to light intensity output from
slices was measured using a custom-made laser scanning a patch cable (200mm silica core, 0.22NA, Thor Labs,)
microscope with a long working distance water used for connection to the epidural optic fiber as mea-
immersed objective (40(cid:4)0.9NA, LUMPlanFI/IR, sured with a PM100 light meter (Thor Labs).
Olympus, Japan). Spinal cord slices were illuminated Mechanical sensitization via peripheral stimulation
by three laser beams: 473nm (MBL-FN, Changchun was induced in fiber implanted Na 1.8-ChR2 mice by
v
New Industries Optoelectronics Technology, China), stimulating the hind paw of anesthetized mice with
594nm (Mambo, Cobolt, Sweden) with a typical aver- 488nm light at a low frequency (2Hz, 10ms pulses) for
agedpowerof3to4mW.Imagingwasperformedbythe 20min as previously described.5 The light intensity used
scanningofthesampleplacedonamicrocontrollerstage for peripheral sensitization was 4 to 5 times higher than
(MPC-200, Sutter Instrument). The 473nm and 594nm peripheral threshold intensity. Anesthesia was induced
lightwastransmittedthroughthetissueandmeasuredby with isoflurane at the minimum concentration required
aphotodetector(818SiMetalWandDetector,Newport, to prevent paw withdrawal from peripheral light stimu-
California,USA)fittedwitha0.8-mmdiameterpinhole. lus (approximately 1.8%). For epidural activation of
The total power of the transmitted light (473nm and ChR2-expressing Na 1.8+ afferents, the behavioral
v
594nm) was recorded for different thickness of the threshold was determined as the lowest intensity of
sample.Themeasuredtransmissionwasfitwithamono- light delivered via the epidural fiber that produced a
exponentially decaying curve. behavioral response in the mice, such as twitching, flee-
We used a schematic model to estimate the power ing,orvocalization.Thelightintensityusedforepidural
of light at the fiber tip required to activate opsins in sensitization was 1.5 to 3 times higher than the behav-
the spinal cord (Figure 3(c)). We assumed an area of ioral threshold, and this intensity induced robust behav-
0.5mm(cid:4)0.5mm (approximately half a spinal segment ioral responses in non-anesthetized mice. Mechanical
in length) on the top of each half of the spinal cord to sensitizationwasinducedinNa 1.8-ChR2micewithepi-
v
be irradiated by one-quarter of the output from the dural stimulation in anesthetized (1.8% isoflurane) and
diffusive optic fiber tip. We accounted for the reduc- non-anesthetized mice with 488nm light at a low fre-
tion in irradiation caused by scattering through myelin quency(2Hz,10mspulses)for20min.Fortestsofther-
with the exponential fit of the empirically measured malandmechanicalsensitivityusingepiduraldeliveryof
transmission of light through myelinated slices. We 592nm laser light, the laser was activated immediately
then calculated the power output from the diffusive priortopresentationofeachthermalorvonFreystimu-
tip of the optic fiber that would be required to activate lusandinactivatedimmediatelyafter.Eachpresentation
opsins in the irradiated area using a threshold of acti- was separated by a minimum of 5min. Mice were accli-
vation (EC ) of 0.3mW(cid:2)mm(cid:3)2 and 0.75mW(cid:2)mm(cid:3)2 matized to the connection of the patch cable and testing
20
for ChR2 and ArchT, respectively,17,18 using the environment for 1h prior to testing. The various optical
formula: approaches used throughout the study are summarized
in Table 1.
Requiredpower ðmWÞ¼EC ðmW(cid:4)mm(cid:3)2Þ
20
(cid:4)irradiatedarea
(cid:2) mm2(cid:3)
Behavioral Experiments
(cid:4)4=ð%transmissionthroughmyelinÞ
Rotarod. Evoked motor performance was tested innaive,
fiber-implanted,andnon-implantedC57BL/6miceusing
a Rotarod (IITC Life Sciences, California, USA). Mice
were tested at least two weeks after fiber implantation
Optogenetic activation
and all mice were age-matched. Rotation was started
The frequency and intensity of the 488 nm laser (iBeam immediately after the mice were placed on the rotarod,
Smart PT, Toptica Inc, Germany) used foractivation of andacceleratedfrom0to35RPMoveraperiodof100s.
ChR2 was controlled directly through TopControl The latency to fall was measured and a cut-off time of
Bonin et al. 7
100swasset,butthecut-offwasnotreachedinanytrial. fiber tip was positioned between vertebral spines T13
Trials were repeated five times per mouse separated by and L1, corresponding with spinal segments L4 through
30min each. L616 (Figure 2(c)). The optic fiber was terminated in a
diffusive tip to enable the diffusion of light ventrally,
Novelcagebehavior. Spontaneousmotorbehavioroffiber- toward the spinal cord (Figure 3(a)). A diffusive tip
implanted and non-implanted C57BL/6 mice was design was chosen for this purpose for its combination
assessed by recording the activity of mice placed in a of robustness and simplicity.
clean cage fitted with a food hopper, similar to their Theactivationofopsinsexpressedinafferentfiberterm-
home cage, but empty of food and water. Mice were inalsandcellsofthespinalcorddorsalhornrequireslight
tested at least two weeks after fiber implantation and fromtheopticfibertopassthroughthemyelinateddorsal
allmicewereage-matched.Fourmiceweretestedsimul- surface of the spinal cord, which will scatter light and
taneously with the experimenter out of the room using reducedorsalhornirradiance.Wefirstmeasuredthetrans-
and behavior was captured using D-Link 942L network mission of light through various thicknesses of myelin to
cameras and recorded with iSpy64 software. The mouse accountforscatteringoflightbymyelin(Figure3(b)).We
behavior and distance traveled by the mice were foundthatthedegreeofscatteringisstronglydetermined
automatically scored using HomeCageScan software bythethicknessofmyelinandthewavelengthoflight,with
(CleverSys Inc, Virginia, USA) and the time spent in 96% to 99% attenuation of light intensity observed
each behavior was totaled. The activity of mice was formyelinthicknessesof50to200mm.Wethenincorpo-
binned into the behavioral categories of exploration ratedthesedataintoasimplemodelofspinalcordillumin-
(dig, forage, sniff, rearing), hanging, and resting ation to estimate the total power of light at the fiber tip
(no movement) behavior. required to activate spinal cord opsins (Figure 3(c)). We
estimatedthatopsinsexpressedinafferentfibersthatenter
Thermal sensitivity. Thermal sensitivity was assessed using the dorsal horn from the dorsal side and are therefore
a Hargreaves thermal sensitivity apparatus (IITC Life verysuperficial(<50mm of myelin)willbeactivated with
Sciences). Mice were placed on a 3/16th-inch thick a totalpoweroutputfromthe tipofthefiberofapproxi-
glass floor warmed to 29(cid:5)C within small (8(cid:4)8cm) mately5to10mWforChR2and10to15mWforArchT
Plexiglascubicles,andafocusedhigh-intensityprojector (Figure2(d)).Opsinsexpressedbyneuronsinthesuperfi-
lamp beam was shone from below onto the mid-plantar cialdorsalhornrequirelighttotraverseapproximately100
surface of the hind paw. For experiments with Na 1.8- to 150mm of myelin and therefore require approximately
v
ArchT mice, a 715-nm long-pass filter (Thor Labs) was 15to35mWofpoweroutputfromthetipofthefiberfor
fittedtotheprojectortoavoidactivationofperipherally thresholdactivationofChR2,and25to40mWforthresh-
expressed ArchT in nociceptive afferents. Light intensity oldactivationofArchT.
during stimulation was adjusted to 75% of maximum The epidural implant was well tolerated in mice, with
with the long-pass filter in place. In experiments with several mice retaining intact fibers and behavioral
GAD2-ArchT mice, the long-pass filter was omitted responses to epidural light stimulation for up to six
and stimulation light intensity was set to 20% of max- monthsafterimplantation.Todeterminewhethertheepi-
imum.A30-swithdrawallatencywasset,andlatencyto duralopticfiberimpairedanimalmovement,wemeasured
withdrawfromthestimuluswasmeasuredtothenearest evoked and spontaneous motor performance in the
0.1s. Both hind paws were tested twice under each con- otarod assay and novel cage activity, respectively, of epi-
dition and all results were averaged for each experimen- duralfiber-implantedandnon-implantedcontrolmice.In
tal condition. the Rotarod assay, epidural fiber-implanted C57BL/6
mice performed as well as non-implanted controls
Mechanical sensitivity. Mechanosensitivity was measured (Figure 2(e)). Additionally, the total distance traveled as
using the SUDO up-down method with von Frey hairs wellastheamountoftimespentactivelyexploring,climb-
to estimate the 50% withdrawal threshold in pressure ing, and resting during a 1-h exposure to a novel home
units (g(cid:2)mm(cid:3)2).19 Both hind paws were tested twice cage environment were similar between implanted and
under each condition and results were averaged for non-implantedmice(Figure2(f)).Thesedatademonstrate
each experimental condition. thattheepiduralfiberimplantdoesnotimpairevokedor
spontaneous motor activity in mice.
Three different optogenetic mouse lines were
Results
implanted with the optic fiber: mice expressing ChR2
The epidural optic fiber consisted of a length of plastic in Na 1.8+ nociceptors (Na 1.8-ChR2 mice),5,13 mice
v v
opticalfiberandceramicferrulewithasmallcementbase expressing the inhibitory opsin ArchT in Na 1.8+ noci-
v
forfixationtotheskull(Figure2(a)and(b)).Thelength ceptors (Na 1.8-ArchT), and mice expressing ArchT in
v
and placement of the fiber was adjusted to ensure the GABAergic interneurons of the spinal cord dorsal horn
8 Molecular Pain 0(0)
(GAD2-ArchT; Table 1). We first sought to use the epi- following the delivery of 592nm light intensities at up
dural optic fiber to activate sensory afferents and induce to 200mW at the fiber tip (data not shown). Of interest,
sensory plasticity in freely behaving Na 1.8-ChR2 mice spinaldeliveryoforangelightdidnotchangethethermal
v
(Figure4(a)).ThespinaldeliveryofbluelighttoNa 1.8- sensitivityofGAD-ArchTmice(Figure4(i)).Thesefind-
v
ChR2 mice implanted with the epidural optic fiber ings are consistent with the recent report that the per-
produced robust nocifensive behavior (Figure 4(b)). manent ablation of dynorphin-expressing GABAergic
Notably, the mechanical withdrawal threshold of and glycinergic interneurons in the dorsal horn select-
Na 1.8-ChR2 mice did not change after implantation ivelyinduceshyperalgesiatomechanicalbutnotthermal
v
of the fiber compared to preimplantation withdrawal stimuli.20 Our results extend these findings by indicating
thresholds in the same mice, indicating the fiber that acute, optogenetic inhibition of inhibitory inter-
implant does not cause mechanical hyperalgesia by neurons in the dorsal horn is sufficient to transiently
itself (Figure 4(c)). Additionally, we confirmed that pro- and reversibly induce mechanical hyperalgesia.
longed, low-frequency peripheral stimulation with blue We next tested whether optogenetic inhibition of
light (488nm) applied to the hind paw under anesthesia Na 1.8+ afferents at the spinal level could effectively
v
inducedlong-lastingmechanicalhyperalgesiainepidural suppress nociception. In Na 1.8-ArchT mice with epi-
v
fiber-implanted Na 1.8-ChR2 mice as compared to duralfiberimplanted(Figure4(j)),theacutespinaldeliv-
v
implantedNa 1.8-ChR2micemicethatreceivedanesthe- ery of orange (592nm) light prolonged the withdrawal
v
sia but no stimulation (Figure 4(d)). latency to noxious thermal stimulation, demonstrating a
We next sought to determine whether the prolonged suppressionofnociception(Figure4(k)).Conversely,the
activation of Na 1.8 afferents at the spinal level via the thermal withdrawal thresholds of epidural-fiber
v
epidural fiber can induce mechanical hypersensitivity. implantedC57BL/6miceusedascontrolswerenotmod-
We first tested the effect of epidural stimulation of ifiedbythespinaldeliveryoforangelightupthehighest
Na 1.8 afferents in anesthetized mice. Compared to lightintensityused, indicatingthat thespinal deliveryof
v
non-stimulated controls, we found that epidural stimu- light itself is neither noxious nor analgesic (Figure 4(l)).
lation produced long-lasting mechanical hyperalgesia
(Figure 4(e)), similar to that produced by peripheral
Discussion
stimulation of the hind paw. Yet, one advantage of the
epidural fiber is the ability to deliver light to the spinal Overall, these results demonstrate the broad utility of
cord of freely behaving (non-anesthetized) animals. We epidural optogenetics for the study and manipulation
next applied the same low-frequency epidural stimula- of sensory afferent and spinal cord sensory network
tion paradigm (2Hz, 20min) in freely behaving Na 1.8- activity. The strategy employed here addresses key limi-
v
ChR2 mice and found that a similar hyperalgesia was tations of other approaches to sensory optogenetics
observed following prolonged epidural light recently described.5,6,12 The epidural implant enables
stimulation as compared to non-stimulated controls the concurrent delivery of any wavelength of light for
(Figure 4(f)). The epidural fiber optogenetic paradigm completeoptogeneticcontrolofdefinedcellpopulations.
thus enables the stable and well-controlled optogenetic The ability to couple the epidural fiber to laser light
exploration of activity-induced hyperalgesia without the sources also enables the delivery of sufficiently strong
potentially confounding effects of anesthesia. light intensities for the activation of inhibitory opsins
To demonstrate the ability to optogenetically modu- such as ArchT as well as the modulation of intrinsic
late intrinsic spinal cord circuits with the epidural optic spinal neurons. By extrapolating our irradiance model,
fiber,weusedGAD2-ArchTmice(Figure4(g))toenable we predict that the epidural optic fiber design described
the selective silencing of spinal inhibitory GABAergic here will enable sufficient irradiance for optogenetic
interneurons. In these mice, the spinal delivery of manipulation of spinal cord neurons throughout the
orange (592nm) light with the epidural fiber reduced dorsal horn. As with other methods to deliver light
mechanical withdrawal thresholds (Figure 4(h)). directly to the spinal cord,12 the epidural optic fiber
Notably, the power requirements we predicted would provides a method for the stable, controlled modulation
be required to activate ArchT within the dorsal horn of sensory afferents in freely behaving animals.5,8 Yet,
directly correspond with our behavioral observations because the epidural fiber is uniquely suitable for the
for the mechanical hyperalgesia induced by inhibition activation of inhibitory opsins and the manipulation of
of GABAergic interneurons. Additionally, the same intrinsic spinal cord neurons, this approach also enables
orange light had no effect on the mechanosensitivity of the use of optogenetics in more complex behavioral
Na 1.8-ChR2 control mice implanted with the fiber, assaysdesigned todissect theintegrationand processing
v
even though they exhibit nocifensive responses to epi- of sensory inputs.
dural delivery of blue light, and no behavioral response Thetransientinductionofmechanicalbutnotthermal
was seen in implanted C57BL/6 or Na 1.8-ChR2 hyperalgesia upon inhibition of GABAergic neurons
v
Bonin et al. 9
Figure 4. Modulationof nociception throughoptogenetic controlof sensoryafferentsandspinal cord interneurons.(a) Schematic
diagramofoptogeneticactivationofChR2-expressingNa1.8+afferentswithbluelightdeliveredbyepiduralopticfiber.(b)Lightintensity
v
thresholdsforbehaviouralresponseofNa1.8-ChR2miceto bluelightdeliveredviaepidural opticfiber. n¼9 mice.(c) Mechanical
v
withdrawalthresholdsofNa1.8-ChR2micebefore(Pre)andafter(Post)implantationoftheepiduralopticfiber.n¼9mice.(d)Reduction
v
ofmechanicalwithdrawalthresholdsofNa1.8-ChR2miceinducedthoughrepetitivestimulationofthehindpawventralsurfacewithblue
v
light(488nm)inmiceimmobilizedwithanesthesia.n¼7micepergroup.(e,f)ReductionofmechanicalwithdrawalthresholdsinNa1.8-
v
ChR2miceinducedthoughrepetitiveepiduralopticalstimulationwithbluelightimmobilizedwithanesthesia(e;n¼5micein0minand
n¼6 micein20minstimulation groups)andinfreely-behaving,non-anesthetized animals (f;n¼7 micepergroup). (g)Schematic of
optogeneticinhibitionofArchT-expressingGAD2+inhibitoryinterneuronsinthespinalcorddorsalhornwithorangelightdeliveredby
epidural opticfiber.(h,i) Reduction of mechanical withdrawalthresholds(h; n¼7 GAD2-ArchT mice,n¼3Na1.8-ChR2mice) but not
v
thermalwithdrawallatencies(i;n¼6mice)viaepiduraldeliveryoforangelightinepiduralfiber-implantedGAD2-ArchTmice.(j)Schematic
of optogeneticinhibition ofArchT-expressing Na1.8+afferents withorange lightdeliveredbyepidural optic fiber.(k,l) Reductionof
v
withdrawallatenciestonoxiousthermalstimulationviadeliveryoforange(592nm)lightinepiduralfiber-implantedNa1.8-ArchT(k;n¼4
v
mice) but not fiber-implantedC57BL/6 mice(l;n¼3 mice).
10 Molecular Pain 0(0)
parallelsresultsrecentlyobtainedthroughthepermanent Declaration of Conflicting Interests
ablation of somatostatin-positive inhibitory neurons in The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with
the dorsal horn.20 These results, together, suggest that respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
thermal and mechanical hyperalgesia involve different article.
changes in spinal cord sensory processing, with spinal
GABAergic disinhibition primarily modulating mechan-
ical sensitivity. However, the temporal fidelity of opto- Funding
geneticsoffersaconsiderableadvantageoverablationor The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial sup-
pharmacologicalinhibitionapproachestothebehavioral port for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
studies of spinal cord function.20,21 In particular, short- article: This work was supported by a Pfizer-Fonds de
termoptogeneticsilencingavoidspossibledevelopmental recherche Quebec-Sante (FRQS) Innovation Fund Award to
or compensatory changes that may accompany perman- YDK, a Canadian Institutes of Health Research grant MOP
ent ablation, as observed in the spontaneous partial 12942 to YDK, and the Catherine Bushnell Pain Research
Fellowship from the Louise and Alan Edwards Foundation
recovery of hyperalgesia induced by ablation of spinal
cord glycinergic neurons.22 to RPB.
Finally, our epidural fiber implant also provides an
important demonstration of the utility of epidural opti-
References
calapproachesforpossiblefutureuseinclinicalsettings.
Chronic, epidural, or intrathecal probes are routinely 1. Todd AJ. Neuronal circuitry for pain processing in the
dorsalhorn. NatRev Neurosci 2010; 11:823–836.
used for spinal drug delivery or electrical stimulation in
2. Prescott SA, Ma Q and De Koninck Y. Normal and
pain.Whilemanyhurdlesstillremain,thetransfectionof
abnormal coding of somatosensory stimuli causing pain.
peripheral nerves to enable optogenetic control of neur-
Nat Neurosci2014; 17: 183–191.
onal activity in humans is a distinct future possibil-
3. BrazJ,SolorzanoC,WangX,etal.Transmittingpainand
ity.23,24 Our results demonstrate the potential of using
itchmessages:acontemporaryviewofthespinalcordcir-
epidural or intrathecal optic fibers for the optogentic
cuitsthatgenerategatecontrol.Neuron2014;82:522–536.
control of specific sensory afferents as a therapeutic 4. DevorM.EctopicdischargeinAbetaafferentsasasource
approach for the treatment of sensory disorders in of neuropathicpain. Exp BrainRes2009; 196: 115–128.
humans. 5. Daou I, Tuttle AH, Longo G, et al. Remote optogenetic
activation and sensitization of pain pathways in freely
moving mice. JNeurosci 2013; 33: 18631–18640.
Conclusions
6. Iyer SM, Montgomery KL, Towne C, et al. Virally
Theepiduralopticfiberdescribedhereprovidesarobust mediated optogenetic excitation and inhibition of pain in
freely moving nontransgenic mice. Nat Biotech 2014; 32:
and powerful solution for spinal optogenetics that
274–278.
enables activation of both excitatory and inhibitory
7. Wang H and Zylka MJ. Mrgprd-expressing polymodal
opsins insensory processing pathways. Our results dem-
nociceptive neurons innervate most known classes of
onstratethepotentialofspinaloptogeneticstomodulate
substantia gelatinosa neurons. J Neurosci 2009; 29:
sensory behavior and produce analgesia in freely behav-
13202–13209.
ing animals.
8. BoninRPandDeKoninckY.Aspinalanalogofmemory
reconsolidation enables reversal of hyperalgesia. Nat
Neurosci 2014; 17: 1043–1045.
Author contributions 9. HonsekSD,SealRPandSandkuhlerJ.Presynapticinhib-
RPB,FW,MDC,andMEBconductedbehavioralandinvitro itionofoptogeneticallyidentifiedVGluT3þsensoryfibres
experiments and analyzed data. RPB, AG, and DCC created byopioids andbaclofen. Pain2015; 156:243–251.
andanalyzedthephysicalmodelofthespinalcord.RPB,FW, 10. HagglundM,DoughertyKJ,BorgiusL,etal.Optogenetic
AG, DCC, and YDK designed all experiments. RPB, DCC, dissectionrevealsmultiplerhythmogenicmodulesunderly-
AG, and YDK wrote the manuscript. All authors reviewed ing locomotion. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2013; 110:
andapproved thefinal manuscript. 11589–11594.
11. Wyart C, Del Bene F, Warp E, et al. Optogenetic dissec-
tionofabehaviouralmoduleinthevertebratespinalcord.
Acknowledgments
Nature 2009; 461:407–410.
TheauthorsthankRohiniKunerforgenerouslyprovidingthe 12. Montgomery KL, Yeh AJ, Ho JS, et al. Wirelessly pow-
Na 1.8-Cre mice; Nicolas Lapointe, Behrang Sharif, and ered, fully internal optogenetics for brain, spinal and per-
v
Jimena Perez-Sanchez for their assistance with the figures; ipheralcircuits in mice. NatMethods2015; 12: 969–974.
Yoan LeChasseur and Anne-Marie Roy for their advice on 13. AgarwalN,OffermannsSandKunerR.Conditionalgene
the design of the optic fiber; and Modesto R. Peralta III for deletioninprimarynociceptiveneuronsoftrigeminalgang-
his inputonthe surgical method. lia anddorsalrootganglia. Genesis2004; 38: 122–129.
Bonin et al. 11
14. Shields SD, Ahn HS, Yang Y, et al. Na 1.8 expression is nociception in rodents using von Frey filaments. Mol
v
not restricted to nociceptors in mouse peripheral nervous Pain2014; 10: 26.
system. Pain2012; 153:2017–2030. 20. DuanB,ChengL,BouraneS,etal.Identificationofspinal
15. VrontouS,WongAM,RauKK,etal.Geneticidentifica- circuitstransmittingandgatingmechanicalpain.Cell2014;
tion of C fibres that detect massage-like stroking of hairy 159: 1417–1432.
skinin vivo. Nature2013; 493: 669–673. 21. Petitjean H, Pawlowski SA, Fraine SL, et al. Dorsal horn
16. Harrison M, O’Brien A, Adams L, et al. Vertebral land- parvalbumin neurons are gate-keepers of touch-evoked
marksfortheidentificationofspinalcordsegmentsinthe pain afternerveinjury. Cell Rep 2015; 13:1246–1257.
mouse. NeuroImage 2013; 68:22–29. 22. Foster E, Wildner H, Tudeau L, et al. Targeted ablation,
17. Han X, Chow BY, Zhou H, et al. A high-light sensitivity silencing, and activation establish glycinergic dorsal horn
optical neural silencer: development and application to neurons as key components of a spinal gate for pain and
optogenetic control of non-human primate cortex. Front itch. Neuron 2015; 85:1289–1304.
SystNeurosci 2011; 5:18. 23. Mallory GW, Grahn PJ, Hachmann JT, et al. Optical
18. Lin JY, Lin MZ, Steinbach P, et al. Characterization of stimulation for restoration of motor function after spinal
engineered channelrhodopsin variants with improved cord injury. MayoClin Proc2015; 90: 300–307.
properties andkinetics. BiophysJ 2009; 96:1803–1814. 24. Williams JC and Denison T. From optogenetic technolo-
19. Bonin RP, Bories C and De Koninck Y. A simplified giestoneuromodulationtherapies.SciTranslMed2013;5:
up-down method (SUDO) for measuring mechanical 177ps6.