Dexmedetomidine Prevents Excessive γ-Aminobutyric
Acid Type A Receptor Function after Anesthesia
Perioperative Medicine
Dian-Shi Wang, M.D., Ph.D., Kirusanthy Kaneshwaran, M.Sc., Gang Lei, M.Sc., M.D.,
Fariya Mostafa, M.Sc., Junhui Wang, M.D., Ph.D., Irene Lecker, Ph.D., Sinziana Avramescu, M.D., Ph.D.,
Yu-Feng Xie, M.D., Ph.D., Nathan K. Chan, B.Sc., Alejandro Fernandez-Escobar, M.D.,
Junsung Woo, Ph.D., Darren Chan, B.Sc., Amy J. Ramsey, Ph.D., Jeremy M. Sivak, Ph.D.,
C. Justin Lee, Ph.D., Robert P. Bonin, Ph.D., Beverley A. Orser, M.D., Ph.D.
ABSTRACT
Background: Postoperative delirium is associated with poor long-term outcomes and increased mortality. General anes-
thetic drugs may contribute to delirium because they increase cell-surface expression and function of α5 subunit-containing
γ-aminobutyric acid type A receptors, an effect that persists long after the drugs have been eliminated. Dexmedetomidine, an
α2 adrenergic receptor agonist, prevents delirium in patients and reduces cognitive deficits in animals. Thus, it was postulated
that dexmedetomidine prevents excessive function of α5 γ-aminobutyric acid type A receptors.
Methods: Injectable (etomidate) and inhaled (sevoflurane) anesthetic drugs were studied using cultured murine hippocampal
neurons, cultured murine and human cortical astrocytes, and ex vivo murine hippocampal slices. γ-Aminobutyric acid type A
receptor function and cell-signaling pathways were studied using electrophysiologic and biochemical methods. Memory and
problem-solving behaviors were also studied.
Results: The etomidate-induced sustained increase in α5 γ-aminobutyric acid type A receptor cell-surface expression was
reduced by dexmedetomidine (mean ± SD, etomidate: 146.4 ± 51.6% vs. etomidate + dexmedetomidine: 118.4 ± 39.1%
of control, n = 8 each). Dexmedetomidine also reduced the persistent increase in tonic inhibitory current in hippocam-
pal neurons (etomidate: 1.44 ± 0.33 pA/pF, n = 10; etomidate + dexmedetomidine: 1.01 ± 0.45 pA/pF, n = 9). Similarly,
dexmedetomidine prevented a sevoflurane-induced increase in the tonic current. Dexmedetomidine stimulated astrocytes
to release brain-derived neurotrophic factor, which acted as a paracrine factor to reduce excessive α5 γ-aminobutyric acid
type A receptor function in neurons. Finally, dexmedetomidine attenuated memory and problem-solving deficits after
anesthesia.
Conclusions: Dexmedetomidine prevented excessive α5 γ-aminobutyric acid type A receptor function after anesthesia. This
novel α2 adrenergic receptor- and brain-derived neurotrophic factor-dependent pathway may be targeted to prevent delirium.
(Anesthesiology 2018; 129:477-89)
T HE availability of safe, modern general anesthetic
What We Already Know about This Topic
drugs has ensured that most patients now survive sur-
gery and are discharged from the hospital. However, many • Dexmedetomidine is effective in reducing delirium in the
patients experience cognitive deficits such as delirium in the postoperative period and in the intensive care unit in
patients and prevents memory deficits in experimental
first few days after surgery.1,2 Delirium is associated with
animals subjected to anesthesia. The mechanism by which
a loss of independence, a failure to return to work, a sub- dexmedetomidine preserves cognition is not clear.
stantial increase in healthcare costs and death.1–3 Given that • In experimental models, even a single anesthetic exposure
more than 312 million patients undergo anesthesia and sur- leads to a sustained increase in the expression of cell-
surface γ-aminobutyric acid type A receptors that contain α5
gery each year,4 it is essential to develop strategies to reduce
subunits. Whether dexmedetomidine reduces this increase
postoperative delirium. Although nonpharmacologic inter- and preserves cognition was evaluated.
ventions are somewhat effective, pharmacologic prevention
What This Article Tells Us That Is New
and treatments are needed.1
The pathophysiology underlying postoperative delirium • Dexmedetomidine, by an α2 receptor-mediated release of
brain-derived neurotrophic factor from astrocytes, reduced
is complex and multifactorial; however, anesthetic drugs are
neuronal α5 γ-aminobutyric acid type A receptor expression
likely a contributing factor. We have previously shown that and prevented cognitive deficits after anesthesia.
even a single, brief exposure to a commonly used general • The data suggest that suppression of anesthesia-induced
sustained increase in α5 γ-aminobutyric acid type A receptor
anesthetic drug can trigger a sustained increase in cell-surface
expression may be a potential therapeutic target for the
expression and function of extrasynaptic γ-aminobutyric prevention of postoperative and intensive care unit delirium.
acid type A (GABA ) receptors containing the α5 subunit
A
This article is featured in “This Month in Anesthesiology,” page 1A. This article has a video abstract. D.-S.W., K.K., and G.L. contributed
equally to this article.
Copyright © 2018, the American Society of Anesthesiologists, Inc. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Anesthesiology 2018; 129:477-89
Anesthesiology, V 129 • No 3 477 September 2018
Copyright © 2018, the American Society of Anesthesiologists, Inc. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
<zdoi;10.1097/ALN.0000000000002311>
Dexmedetomidine, Receptor Cell-surface Expression
(α5 GABA receptors) in hippocampal neurons.5 These (0.9% w/v of NaCl, intraperitoneally) and propylene glycol
A
changes persist long after the anesthetic drugs have been (35% v/v in normal saline) were used as vehicle controls for
eliminated from the body. To date, no effective strategy has dexmedetomidine and etomidate, respectively. To prevent
been identified to prevent excessive α5 GABA receptor cell- hypoxia, each mouse was anesthetized in an air-tight acrylic
A
surface expression after general anesthesia. chamber that was flushed with oxygen and medical air (70%
The α2 adrenergic receptor agonist dexmedetomidine air, 30% O ) delivered at a flow of 1 l/min, as described
2
lowers the incidence and duration of delirium in patients previously.5 Temperature in the chamber was maintained at
who have undergone cardiac and noncardiac surgery.6–8 35°C with a heating blanket to prevent hypothermia. A total
Dexmedetomidine also reduces delirium in patients who of 44 mice were treated with dexmedetomidine and etomi-
have been sedated for days in intensive care units.9 Stud- date. Four of these mice died 30 to 50 min after treatment.
ies of laboratory animals have confirmed that dexmedeto- None of the mice treated with etomidate alone (n = 42) or
midine can prevent cognitive deficits after anesthesia and dexmedetomidine alone (n = 43) died.
surgery.10–13 Here, we investigated the cellular and molecular
mechanisms that contribute to the cognition-sparing proper- Cell-surface Biotinylation
ties of dexmedetomidine. We postulated that dexmedetomi- An anti-GABA receptor antibody for α5 (PhosphoSolu-
A
dine reduces the excessive function of α5 GABA receptors tions, USA), an anti-β-actin antibody (GenScript Biotech
A
in neurons that persists after general anesthesia and thereby Corporation, USA), and an anti-Na+/K+ ATPase antibody
attenuates postanesthetic cognitive deficits. (Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank, USA) were used
to measure cell-surface expression of α5 GABA receptors,
A
Materials and Methods as previously described.5
Experimental Animals
Primary Cell Culture
Experiments were approved by the Animal Care Commit-
Primary cultures of hippocampal and cortical neurons were
tee of the University of Toronto. All studies were performed prepared from mice (embryonic days 16 to 18).15,16 For
in accordance with guidelines from the Canadian Council
the astrocyte cultures, cortical explants were isolated from
on Animal Care. The mice were located in a pathogen-free
mouse embryos, and cell cultures were grown to conflu-
facility (25 ± 1°C) on a 14-h light/10-h dark cycle (lights
ence in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium and 10% fetal
on 6:00 AM to 8:00 PM). Timed-pregnant CD1 mice were bovine serum for 4 weeks.17–19 The cells were then enzymati-
used to prepare the cell cultures (Charles River, USA). Male
cally dissociated with 0.05% trypsin–EDTA (Life Technolo-
C57BL/6 mice aged 8 to 9 weeks (Charles River) were used
gies, USA). The astrocyte-containing cell suspension was
for behavioral studies, which were performed between 10:00
placed over hippocampal neurons that were cultured for 7
AM and 5:00 PM. Only male mice were selected for the behav- days. Cocultures were maintained for 7 to 10 days before
ioral studies because the estrous cycle influences the expres-
recording from the neurons.
sion of extrasynaptic GABA receptors.14 Each mouse was
A
assigned a random number that was generated by Microsoft Cultured Astrocytes from Human Optic Nerve
(USA) Excel 2016. The assigned numbers were sorted from
Human astrocytes were isolated from optic nerve heads
the smallest to the largest, and then the mice were allocated
obtained from deceased donors. Such astrocytes grow well in
to different treatment groups. Researchers were blinded to
primary cell culture and closely resemble cortical astrocytes.
the treatment groups for all behavioral experiments and the Their functional properties have been characterized.20,21
studies using ex vivo brain slices.
After the fifth passage, the human astrocytes were plated and
grown to confluence in a monolayer.
Anesthesia
The mice were treated with dexmedetomidine (25 μg/ Whole-cell Voltage-clamp Recordings
kg, intraperitoneally), which was followed immediately by
Conventional whole-cell voltage-clamp recordings were per-
etomidate (20 mg/kg, intraperitoneally). Normal saline formed from cultured hippocampal and cortical neurons.5,16
At the time of recordings, the neurons become polarized,
Submitted for publication December 19, 2017. Accepted for have extensive axonal and dendritic arbors, and form numer-
publication May 14, 2018. From the Departments of Physiology (D.-
ous, functional synapses. Thus, they resemble mature neurons
S.W., K.K., G.L., F.M., J.W., I.L., Y.-F.X., N.K.C., A.F.-E., A.J.R., B.A.O.),
Anesthesia (A.S., B.A.O.), Pharmacology and Toxicology (A.J.R.), in vivo.22–24 To record the tonic GABA receptor-mediated
A
and Ophthalmology and Vision Science (J.M.S.) and the Leslie Dan current, GABA (0.5 μM) was added to the extracellular
Faculty of Pharmacy (Y.-F.X., R.P.B.), University of Toronto, Toronto,
solution. This GABA concentration was selected because it
Ontario, Canada; the Department of Anesthesia, Sunnybrook Health
Sciences Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada (S.A., B.A.O.); the Center is similar to the extracellular concentration of GABA that
for Neuroscience and Connectomics, Korea Institute of Science and occurs in vivo.25–27 The competitive GABA receptor antago-
Technology, Seoul, Korea (J.W., C.J.L.); and the Division of Vision A
nist bicuculline (20 μM) was used to measure the amplitude
Sciences, Krembil Research Institute, University Health Network,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada (D.C., J.M.S.). of the tonic current.5,16,28 Previous studies showed that the
Anesthesiology 2018; 129:477-89 478 Wang et al.
Copyright © 2018, the American Society of Anesthesiologists, Inc. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
PERIoPERATIvE MEDICINE
tonic current in hippocampal neurons is generated primarily conditioned medium was collected and analyzed for brain-
by α5 GABA receptors.5,29 Current was recorded at a hold- derived neurotrophic factor with an enzyme-linked immu-
A
ing potential of −60 mV at room temperature. nosorbent assay kit (lot No. 381264701; BosterBio, USA).
Briefly, 200 μl of medium was loaded in each well of a 96-well
Western Blotting plate and then coated with mouse monoclonal antibody
Astrocytes were treated with dexmedetomidine (0.1 μM) or against brain-derived neurotrophic factor. A brain-derived
vehicle (1 × phosphate-buffered saline) for 1 h. The culture neurotrophic factor-specific biotin-conjugated secondary
medium was then exchanged with fresh medium without antibody was then added, followed by the avidin–biotin–
fetal bovine serum. After 2 h, the medium was collected and peroxidase complex enzyme and substrate incubation. The
then lysed in a cold lysis buffer that contained phosphatase absorbance of each sample was measured at 450 nm using
and a protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma–Aldrich, USA). microplate reader (Synergy Mx, BioTek, USA). A standard
After centrifugation at 10,000 relative centrifugal force curve was created by using the brain-derived neurotrophic
for 10 min, the protein concentration was measured with factor standard, and then the concentration of brain-derived
a bicinchoninic acid kit (Thermo Scientific Pierce Protein neurotrophic factor was measured.
Biology, USA). Proteins were separated by electrophoresis
with sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electropho- Novel Object Recognition to Test Memory
resis and then transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes. The novel object recognition assay was performed as previ-
Primary antibodies to detect phosphorylated extracellular ously described.5 An opaque cylinder-shaped arena that mea-
signal–regulated kinase (1:1,000, Cell Signaling, USA), sured 28.5 cm in diameter and 29 cm in height was housed in
extracellular signal–regulated kinase (1:1,000, Cell Signal- a dimly lit room. Each mouse was habituated to the cham-
ing), and the corresponding secondary antibody (1:4,000, ber for 5 min 24 h before testing. The mouse was trained
Cell Signaling) were used, and the membrane was devel- and tested 24 h after drug treatment. During the train-
oped with the ECL kit (PerkinElmer, Canada). An antibody ing phase, the mouse was allowed to explore two identical
against β-actin (1:4,000, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, USA) “sample” objects for 5 min. Interaction time with the objects
was used as an internal control. was defined when the mouse was sniffing, licking, or touch-
ing the object with the nose. The time when the mouse was
Real-time Polymerase Chain Reaction Detection of Brain- approaching, climbing, or sitting on the object was excluded.
derived Neurotrophic Factor Messenger RNA
Mouse astrocytes were maintained in culture for 4 weeks. Puzzle Box to Test Problem-solving
The cells were treated with dexmedetomidine (0.1 μM) or Executive function was assessed using a puzzle box,30 which
vehicle (1 × phosphate-buffered saline) for 1 h. The culture consisted of an illuminated start box (58 × 28 × 27.5 cm3) and
medium was exchanged with fresh medium that lacked fetal a dark, enclosed goal box (14 × 28 × 27.5 cm3). A doorway and
bovine serum and were incubated for 2 h. Astrocytes were an underpass that connected the start box with the goal box
then lysed with a TRIzol reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, allowed the animals to move between the two compartments.
USA) to extract the total RNA. The first-strand cDNA was The mice were tested during a 3-day period, and the level of
generated from total RNA with iScript reverse transcription difficulty increased sequentially over day 1 (trials 1 to 3), day
supermix for quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction 2 (trials 4 to 6), and day 3 (trials 7 to 8). To assess problem-
(Bio-Rad Laboratories, Canada). Primer probe sets for mouse solving abilities, the task was made increasingly more difficult
brain-derived neurotrophic factor were purchased from Bio- by modifying the entrance to the goal box. On day 1, trial
Rad Laboratories (Unique Assay ID: qMmuCED0050333, 1, the goal box was accessible through both an open door-
UniGene: Mm.1442). Polymerase chain reaction amplification way and an open underpass. On day 1, trial 2, the doorway
was done using SsoAdvanced Universal SYBR Green Supermix was closed, and the goal box was accessible only through the
reagent (Bio-Rad Laboratories). The level of messenger RNA underpass. Trial 3 was conducted 2 min after trial 2 under the
(mRNA) was measured with a CFX96 real-time polymerase same conditions to assess an ability to recall escape strategies.
chain reaction detection system (Bio-Rad Laboratories) and Trials 4 to 6 were conducted on day 2. Trial 4 was performed
normalized to β-actin RNA transcript levels. The comparative under the same conditions as trial 2. During trial 5, the task
2−ΔΔCT method was used for relative quantification. was rendered more difficult by closing the door and obstruct-
ing the underpass with corncob bedding. This condition
Enzyme-linked Immunosorbent Assay Analysis of Brain- required that the mouse burrow through the bedding to gain
derived Neurotrophic Factor access to the goal box. Trial 6 was performed 2 min after trial
Mouse astrocytes were cultured in 96-well plates for 4 weeks 5 under the same conditions. Trials 7 to 8 were conducted
and then treated with dexmedetomidine (0.01 to 10 μM) or on day 3. Trial 7 was performed under the same conditions
vehicle control for 1 h. Six wells were used for each drug con- as trial 5. During trial 8, the difficulty was increased by
centration. The culture medium was then changed to 50 μl obstructing the underpass with a cardboard plug, which the
of fresh medium that lacked fetal bovine serum for 2 h. The mouse had to remove to gain access to the goal box. During
Anesthesiology 2018; 129:477-89 479 Wang et al.
Copyright © 2018, the American Society of Anesthesiologists, Inc. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Dexmedetomidine, Receptor Cell-surface Expression
the 2-min intertrial intervals, the mouse was taken out of the Results
puzzle box and placed in a cage that was separate from their
Dexmedetomidine Reduces Cell-surface Expression and
home cage. Performance was video-recorded, and the time
Function of α5 GABA Receptors after General Anesthesia
required for each animal to enter the goal box, which was A
We first asked whether dexmedetomidine reduced excessive cell-
defined as having all four paws in the goal compartment, was
surface expression of α5 GABA receptors in mice that were
measured. A maximum finish time of 5 min was assigned if A
treated with an anesthetic drug. Etomidate was selected for these
the mouse failed to reach the goal box during the trial.
proof-of-concept studies because it has no active metabolites, it
is relatively selective for GABA receptors, it is rapidly eliminated
Drugs and Chemicals A
in vivo, and it causes minimal depressant effects on cardiac func-
Tetrodotoxin and brain-derived neurotrophic factor
tion and respiration. Etomidate is also a structural analog of the
were purchased from Alomone Labs (Israel). 6-Cyano-7- “next generation” of injectable anesthetic drugs.31,32
nitroquinoxaline-2,3-dione, (2R)-amino-5-phosphonovaleric,
The mice were treated with dexmedetomidine (25 μg/kg,
and bicuculline were obtained from Abcam (United Kingdom).
intraperitoneally) followed by etomidate (20 mg/kg, intraper-
GABA, etomidate, clonidine, yohimbine, and PD98059
itoneally). Twenty-four hours later, the mice were euthanized,
were obtained from Sigma–Aldrich. Dexmedetomidine was
and ex vivo hippocampal slices were processed for biotinylation
obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, sevoflurane was
analyses of surface proteins. Etomidate triggered a sustained
obtained from AbbVie Inc. (Canada), and ANA12 was from increase in the cell-surface expression of α5 GABA receptors
A
Cedarlane (Canada).
(146.4 ± 51.6% of control, 95% CI 107.4 to 185.6%; n = 8
each; fig. 1A) as shown previously.5 Cotreatment with dex-
Statistical Analysis
medetomidine reduced this increase (118.4 ± 39.1% of con-
The data are presented as means ± SD, together with
trol, 95% CI 89.1 to 147.6%; n = 8). The total expression of
the 95% CI of the mean. An unpaired Student’s t test α5 subunit protein was not significantly changed by either
was used to compare two groups, where appropriate. For etomidate or dexmedetomidine (fig. 1B).
comparing three or more groups, the one-way ANOVA or To determine whether dexmedetomidine prevented the
two-way ANOVA followed by the Tukey’s multiple com- increase in α5 GABA receptor function that persists after
A
parisons post hoc test was used. The normality of datasets the anesthetic has been eliminated, a tonic inhibitory cur-
was tested with the D’Agostino–Pearson omnibus test (n rent was recorded from hippocampal neurons that were
≥ 8) or the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test (n < 8). To test for cocultured with cortical astrocytes. The design of these stud-
homogeneity of variances, the Brown–Forsythe test and ies was based on our previous work showing that astrocytes
an F test was used for the ANOVA and unpaired Stu- were required to generate the anesthetic-induced persistent
dent’s t test, respectively. When assumptions were not increase in tonic current in neurons.5 Cocultures of neurons
met, the nonparametric Mann–Whitney U test was per- and astrocytes were treated with etomidate (1 μM) and/or
formed instead of the unpaired Student’s t test. Because dexmedetomidine (0.1 μM) for 1 h and then washed, and
there is a high degree of variation for puzzle box data, 24 h later, the tonic current was recorded. Etomidate alone
the normality assumptions and homogeneity of variances increased the amplitude of the tonic current, whereas no
for the log10-transformed data were confirmed with the increase was observed in cultures cotreated with etomidate
D’Agostino–Pearson omnibus test and the Brown–For- and dexmedetomidine (control: 0.68 ± 0.19 pA/pF, 95%
sythe test, respectively. The Kaplan–Meier survival analy- CI 0.48 to 0.88, n = 6; etomidate: 1.44 ± 0.33 pA/pF, 95%
ses of puzzle box data were compared with the log-rank CI 1.20 to 1.67, n = 10; etomidate + dexmedetomidine:
pairwise comparison test, and right censoring was applied 1.01 ± 0.45 pA/pF, 95% CI 0.66 to 1.36, n = 9; fig. 1C).
at the cut-off time of 5 min. A linear mixed model was We next asked whether the most commonly used inhaled
employed for statistical analysis of cell-surface and total general anesthetic, sevoflurane, also increased the tonic current
expression of the GABA receptor α5 subunit using IBM in hippocampal neurons and, if so, whether dexmedetomidine
A
SPSS Statistics for Windows, version 23 (IBM Corp., prevented this increase. Treating the cocultures with a clinically
USA). All other analyses were performed using GraphPad relevant concentration of sevoflurane (266 μM) increased the
Prism 6.01 (GraphPad Software Inc., USA). A two-tailed amplitude of the tonic current, and this increase was prevented
hypothesis test was used, and statistical significance was by cotreatment with dexmedetomidine (fig. 1C).
set at P < 0.05. No statistical power calculation was con- Cognitive deficits after anesthesia also involve the function
ducted before the study, and the sample size was based of the cortex. Thus, we studied whether etomidate triggered a
on our previous experience with this experimental design. persistent increase in tonic current in cortical neurons. Cortical
During peer review, the sample size for real-time poly- neurons that were cocultured with astrocytes were pretreated
merase chain reaction detection of brain-derived neuro- with etomidate, as described above. The amplitude of the tonic
trophic factor mRNA was increased, but no adjustments current measured 24 h after treatment was increased. This
were made for interim analyses. No outliers were excluded increase did not occur in cortical neurons that were cotreated
from the statistical analyses. with etomidate and dexmedetomidine (fig. 1D).
Anesthesiology 2018; 129:477-89 480 Wang et al.
Copyright © 2018, the American Society of Anesthesiologists, Inc. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
PERIoPERATIvE MEDICINE
Fig. 1. Dexmedetomidine prevents the sustained increase in extrasynaptic γ-aminobutyric acid type A (GABA ) receptor function
A
induced by general anesthetics. (A, B) Representative Western blots and summarized data of the cell-surface (A) and total (B)
expression of α5 subunits. n = 8. A linear mixed model: F = 9.1, P = 0.0005 for (A) and F = 1.9, P = 0.16 for (B). Molecular
(3, 21) (3, 21)
weight (MW) is shown as kDa. (C) Representative recordings of tonic current generated by GABA receptors. The summarized
A
data show that dexmedetomidine (Dex, 0.1 µM) prevented the sustained increase in a tonic current induced by etomidate
(Etom, 1 µM) and sevoflurane (Sevo, 266 µM) in hippocampal neurons cocultured with astrocytes. (Middle) n = 6, 10, 9, 9 (left to
right); one-way ANOVA, F = 8.3, P = 0.0004, Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. (Right) n = 10, 9, 7, 9 (left to right); one-way
(3,30)
ANOVA, F = 7.5, P = 0.0007, Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. (D) Quantified data show similar effects of dexmedetomidine
(3,31)
(0.1 µM) in cortical neurons cocultured with astrocytes. n = 7, 14, 11, 11 (left to right); one-way ANOVA, F = 13.3, P < 0.0001,
(3,39)
Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. The data are means ± SD. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; *** P < 0.001. Bic = bicuculline; Ctrl = control;
NKA = Na/K-ATPase.
Dexmedetomidine Targets α2 Adrenergic Receptors in neurons, astrocytes alone were treated with etomidate
Astrocytes (1 μM) or dexmedetomidine (0.1 μM) plus etomidate
Dexmedetomidine prevented the anesthetic-induced increase for 1 h, washed, and incubated for 2 h. The conditioned
in tonic current in neurons by acting either: (1) directly on the medium was then transferred to hippocampal neurons,
neurons or (2) indirectly on the astrocytes to release factors that and 24 h later, the tonic current was recorded in the neu-
regulate GABA receptors in neurons. To distinguish between rons (fig. 2B). Medium from etomidate-treated, but not
A
these two potential mechanisms, astrocytes and hippocampal vehicle-treated, astrocytes increased the amplitude of the
neurons were cultured separately. First, the astrocytes alone tonic current. Importantly, medium from astrocytes treated
were treated with etomidate (1 μM), and the neurons were with both dexmedetomidine and etomidate yielded no such
treated with dexmedetomidine (0.1 μM). After 1 h, the cells increase. Thus, dexmedetomidine treatment of astrocytes
were washed with drug-free medium, and 2 h later, the con- was sufficient to prevent the etomidate-induced persistent
ditioned medium from the astrocytes was transferred to the increase in tonic current.
dexmedetomidine-treated neurons. Neurons were incubated Astrocytes from humans and mice share many pheno-
for 24 h, and then the tonic current was recorded (fig. 2A). typic properties; however, their transcriptome, structural,
Under these conditions, dexmedetomidine did not prevent and functional features can differ.33 Therefore, we studied
the etomidate-induced increase in current. Thus, dexmedeto- human astrocytes obtained from optic nerve heads to deter-
midine treatment of astrocytes was necessary to prevent the mine whether they also released soluble factors that increased
anesthetic-induced increase in tonic current in neurons. the tonic current in mouse hippocampal neurons and, if so,
To determine whether dexmedetomidine treatment whether treatment of human astrocytes with dexmedetomi-
of astrocytes was sufficient to reduce the tonic current in dine could attenuate such an increase.
Anesthesiology 2018; 129:477-89 481 Wang et al.
Copyright © 2018, the American Society of Anesthesiologists, Inc. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Dexmedetomidine, Receptor Cell-surface Expression
Fig. 2. Dexmedetomidine activation of α2 adrenergic receptors in astrocytes prevents the etomidate-induced increase in ton-
ic current. (A) Schematic diagrams and summarized data show that astrocytes are necessary for the preventative effects of
dexmedetomidine (Dex). When neurons alone were treated with dexmedetomidine (0.1 µM), dexmedetomidine did not pre-
vent etomidate (Etom)-induced sustained increase in tonic current. n = 8, 12, 7, 7 (left to right); one-way ANOVA, F = 9.6,
(3,30)
P = 0.0001; Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. (B) Schematic diagrams and summarized data show that treatment of astrocytes
was sufficient for dexmedetomidine effects. When astrocytes were treated with both dexmedetomidine (0.1 µM) and etomidate
(1 µM), the etomidate-induced sustained increase in tonic current was abolished. n = 6, 7, 5, 6 (left to right); one-way ANOVA,
F = 6.7, P = 0.003; Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. Due to the relatively small sample size, a Brown–Forsythe test showed
(3,20)
inequality of group variances. Because all other datasets obtained using a similar experimental design showed equal variances,
we performed one-way ANOVA. (C) Human astrocytes were also sufficient for the protective effects of dexmedetomidine. When
human astrocytes were treated with both dexmedetomidine (0.1 µM) and etomidate (1 µM), the etomidate-induced sustained
increase in tonic current was abolished. n = 13, 13, 9, 6 (left to right); one-way ANOVA, F = 11.4, P < 0.0001; Tukey’s multiple
(3,37)
comparisons test. (D) The α2 adrenergic receptor antagonist yohimbine (Yoh, 1 µM) blocked dexmedetomidine attenuation of
sustained increase in tonic current. (Left) n = 6; one-way ANOVA, F = 7.5, P = 0.006; Tukey’s multiple comparisons test.
(2,15)
(Right) n = 6; unpaired Student’s t test, P = 0.46. (E) The α2 adrenergic receptor agonist clonidine (Clon, 1 µM) mimicked dexme-
detomidine effects. n = 6, 6, 6, 7 (left to right); one-way ANOVA, F = 7.5, P = 0.0013; Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. The
(3,21)
data are means ± SD. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001. Ctrl = control; N.S. = not significant.
Anesthesiology 2018; 129:477-89 482 Wang et al.
Copyright © 2018, the American Society of Anesthesiologists, Inc. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
PERIoPERATIvE MEDICINE
Fig. 3. Dexmedetomidine acts through phosphorylated extracellular signal–regulated kinase– and brain-derived neurotrophic fac-
tor (BDNF)–dependent pathways. (A, B) Representative Western blots and summarized data of the phosphorylated extracellular
signal–regulated kinase (A) and the total extracellular signal–regulated kinase (B). β-Actin was used as a loading control. (A) n = 6;
P = 0.002; nonparametric Mann–Whitney U test. (B) n = 4; unpaired Student’s t test. The molecular weight (MW) is shown as
kDa. (C) Extracellular signal–regulated kinase inhibitor PD98059 (PD, 50 µM) blocked dexmedetomidine attenuation of etomidate-
induced increase in tonic current. Treating astrocytes with PD98059 alone had no effect on the tonic current. (Left) n = 5, 6, 6, 7
(left to right); one-way ANOVA, F = 12.6, P < 0.0001; Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. (Right) n = 5, 6 (left to right); unpaired
(3,20)
Student’s t test, P = 0.29. (D) Conditioned medium from astrocytes treated with dexmedetomidine (0.1 µM) could prevent the
etomidate-induced increase in tonic current in neurons. Heating the conditioned medium abolished this effect. n = 8, 11, 12 (left
to right); one-way ANOVA, F = 5.6, P = 0.009; Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. (E) Representative curves and summarized
(2,28)
data show that the level of brain-derived neurotrophic factor messenger RNA was increased in the conditioned medium from
astrocytes treated with dexmedetomidine (0.1 µM). n = 8, *P = 0.042, unpaired Student’s t test. (F) brain-derived neurotrophic fac-
tor in medium from astrocytes treated with dexmedetomidine (0.1 to 10 µM) was measured with enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay. Levels were detected only when astrocytes were treated with dexmedetomidine at concentrations greater than 0.01 µM.
n = 5. (G) Brain-derived neurotrophic factor mimicked dexmedetomidine and prevented etomidate-induced increase in tonic cur-
rent. n = 8, 7, 8, 6 (left to right); one-way ANOVA, F = 16.6, P < 0.0001; Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. (H) Brain-derived
(3,25)
neurotrophic factor receptor (tropomyosin receptor kinase B [TrkB]) antagonist ANA 12 blocked the effects of dexmedetomidine.
n = 8, 11, 12, 9, 7 (left to right); one-way ANOVA, F = 7.7, P < 0.0001; Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. The data are means
(4,42)
± SD. * = P < 0.05; ** = P < 0.01; *** = P < 0.001. Ctrl = control; Dex = dexmedetomidine; Etom = etomidate; N.S. = not significant.
Anesthesiology 2018; 129:477-89 483 Wang et al.
Copyright © 2018, the American Society of Anesthesiologists, Inc. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Dexmedetomidine, Receptor Cell-surface Expression
Cultured human astrocytes were treated with etomidate because heating the conditioned medium from dexmedeto-
and dexmedetomidine for 1 h and then washed. The condi- midine-treated astrocytes to 99.9°C for 5 min prevented the
tioned medium was transferred to the cultured neurons 2 h supernatant from triggering the etomidate-induced increase
later, and the tonic current was recorded 24 h later (fig. 2B). in tonic current in neurons (fig. 3D).
The conditioned medium from the etomidate-treated Dexmedetomidine stimulation of phosphorylated extra-
human astrocytes increased the tonic current; cotreatment cellular signal–regulated kinase could lead to an increase in
with dexmedetomidine prevented this increase (fig. 2C). the expression of genes that encode for neurotrophic factors
Dexmedetomidine is a high-affinity α2 adrenergic recep- such as brain-derived neurotrophic factor, which is known
tor agonist. To determine whether activation of α2 adren- to modulate GABA receptor activity.34–36 Indeed, treating
A
ergic receptor was necessary for the protective effects of the astrocytes with dexmedetomidine (0.1 μM) increased
dexmedetomidine, the antagonist yohimbine (1 μM) was the expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor mRNA
coapplied with dexmedetomidine (0.1 μM). Yohimbine (fig. 3E). Dexmedetomidine also increased brain-derived
blocked the dexmedetomidine attenuation of etomidate- neurotrophic factor protein levels (fig. 3F).
induced increase in tonic current (fig. 2D). In addition, To test whether brain-derived neurotrophic factor was suf-
the less potent α2 adrenergic receptor agonist clonidine (1 ficient to mimic the effects of the unidentified soluble factor,
μM) mimicked the effect of dexmedetomidine, because it exogenous brain-derived neurotrophic factor (200 pg/ml) was
prevented the etomidate-induced increase in tonic current applied directly to the neurons. Brain-derived neurotrophic
in hippocampal neurons (fig. 2E). Collectively, these results factor prevented the etomidate-induced increase in tonic cur-
suggest that dexmedetomidine activates α2 adrenergic recep- rent (fig. 3G). Because brain-derived neurotrophic factor is
tors in astrocytes to reverse the etomidate-induced persistent known to act on tropomyosin receptor kinase B (TrkB) recep-
increase in tonic current in neurons. tors, we next tested whether treating the hippocampal neu-
rons with an antagonist for TrkB receptors (ANA 12, 0.01
Dexmedetomidine Acts through Phosphorylated μg/ml) abolished dexmedetomidine reduction of the etomi-
Extracellular Signal–regulated Kinase- and Brain-derived date-enhanced tonic current (fig. 3H). ANA 12 prevented the
Neurotrophic Factor-dependent Pathways effect of dexmedetomidine, suggesting that dexmedetomidine
Activation of α2 adrenergic receptors in astrocytes stimulates stimulates astrocytes to release brain-derived neurotrophic fac-
multiple G protein–coupled receptor signaling pathways, tor, which in turn acted on hippocampal neurons to reduce
including those involving extracellular signal–regulated protein the etomidate-induced increase in tonic current.
kinases 1 and 2.34,35 We reasoned that the increase in phos-
phorylated extracellular signal–regulated kinase could con- Dexmedetomidine Prevents Postanesthetic Cognitive
tribute to dexmedetomidine reduction of the tonic current in Deficits
neurons. To investigate whether dexmedetomidine increased Finally, we asked whether dexmedetomidine prevented the
levels of phosphorylated extracellular signal–regulated kinase behavioral deficits in memory and problem-solving that are
in astrocytes, cultured murine astrocytes were pretreated with observed in vivo after the anesthetic drug has been elimi-
dexmedetomidine (0.1 μM, for 1 h) and then washed, and 2 h nated from the body. The novel object recognition task
later, the cells were processed for Western blotting analysis. The was selected and performed first because this test has been
results showed that dexmedetomidine increased phosphory- shown to be sensitive to an increase in α5 GABA receptor
A
lated extracellular signal–regulated kinase but not total extra- activity.5
cellular signal–regulated kinase (fig. 3, A and B). The mice were treated with dexmedetomidine (25 μg/
To determine whether the dexmedetomidine-induced kg, intraperitoneally) or vehicle then etomidate (20 mg/kg,
increase in phosphorylated extracellular signal–regulated intraperitoneally) and 24 h later were studied using the novel
kinase was involved in the signaling pathway that prevented object recognition task.30 Notably, dexmedetomidine mark-
the etomidate-induced increase in tonic current in hippo- edly prolonged the duration of etomidate-induced anesthe-
campal neurons, cultured astrocytes were cotreated with sia. Specifically, dexmedetomidine alone did not cause the
dexmedetomidine and PD98059 (50 μM), a compound loss of righting reflex, but cotreatment of dexmedetomidine
that inhibits the production of phosphorylated extracellular plus etomidate prolonged the duration of the loss of right-
signal–regulated kinase. Dexmedetomidine failed to prevent ing reflex by 32% (etomidate: 26.8 ± 7.9 min vs. etomidate
the etomidate-induced increase in tonic current in neurons + dexmedetomidine: 35.3 ± 7.6 min, n = 22; unpaired Stu-
(fig. 3C), suggesting that dexmedetomidine acted via a phos- dent’s t test, P = 0.0007). These results are consistent with
phorylated extracellular signal–regulated kinase 1/2–depen- the anesthetic-potentiating effects of dexmedetomidine
dent pathway. observed in patients.37
The results show that dexmedetomidine stimulates astro- The novel object recognition task measures the ability
cytes to release one or more soluble factors that act in a para- of mice to distinguish a novel object from a familiar object
crine manner to prevent the etomidate-induced increase in (fig. 4A). During the training phase, the interaction time of
tonic current in neurons. These factor(s) were heat-sensitive the mice was similar for the two objects (data not shown).
Anesthesiology 2018; 129:477-89 484 Wang et al.
Copyright © 2018, the American Society of Anesthesiologists, Inc. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
PERIoPERATIvE MEDICINE
Fig. 4. Dexmedetomidine prevents persistent cognitive deficits after general anesthesia. (A) A timeline illustrates the experimental
design. (B) Memory performance on the novel object recognition task. n = 10, 12, 10, 13 (left to right); one-way ANOVA, F = 4.1,
(3,41)
P = 0.01. * = P < 0.05, Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. The discrimination ratio for each treatment group is significantly different
from the theoretical mean of 0.5 except for the etomidate group (Ctrl: P = 0.003, Etom: P = 0.35, Etom+Dex: P = 0.005, Dex: P = 0.037;
one-sample t test). (C) Total travel distance (one-way ANOVA, F = 0.39, P = 0.76) and the total interaction time (one-way ANOVA,
(3,41)
F = 0.45, P = 0.72) from the same cohort as shown in B. (D) Diagrams show the timeline and various problem-solving tasks for
(3,41)
the puzzle box assay. (E, left) After treatment with etomidate, mice exhibited a longer latency to enter the goal box for the plug task
and dexmedetomidine reduced the latency. n = 22. Two-way ANOVA, effect of tasks: F = 21.0, P < 0.0001; effect of treatment:
(3,252)
F = 6.3, P = 0.002; effect of interaction: F = 0.82, P = 0.56. ** = P < 0.01 compared with etomidate + dexmedetomidine,
(2,252) (6,252)
Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. (Right) Kaplan–Meier survival plots further illustrate the effects of etomidate and dexmedetomidine
on the plug task. Log-rank pairwise comparison: P = 0.016 for Etom versus Ctrl, P = 0.022 for Etom versus Etom + DEX, and P = 0.77
for Etom + DEX versus Ctrl. (F) Similarly, etomidate increased the latency for the mice to complete the task and dexmedetomidine
abolished the increase. Log-rank pairwise comparison: P = 0.016 for Etom versus Ctrl, P = 0.009 for Etom versus Etom + DEX, and
P = 0.96 for Etom + DEX versus Ctrl. The data are means ± SD. Ctrl = control; Dex or DEX = dexmedetomidine; Etom = etomidate.
Anesthesiology 2018; 129:477-89 485 Wang et al.
Copyright © 2018, the American Society of Anesthesiologists, Inc. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Dexmedetomidine, Receptor Cell-surface Expression
During the testing phase, the mice that were treated with Discussion
etomidate failed to distinguish the novel object, as shown
The goal of this study was to use a reverse translational
by the low discrimination ratio (i.e., the time spent explor-
approach to identify the cellular and molecular mechanisms
ing the novel object relative to time spent exploring both
that contribute to the cognition-sparing properties of dexme-
objects; fig. 4B). Dexmedetomidine markedly attenuated
detomidine. The results show that dexmedetomidine activates
the etomidate-induced deficits in memory performance. The α2 adrenergic receptors in astrocytes and stimulates the release
cognition-sparing effect of dexmedetomidine could not be of brain-derived neurotrophic factor, which acts as a paracrine
attributed to differences in locomotion or overall exploratory factor to prevent excessive cell-surface expression and function
drive (fig. 4C). of α5 GABA receptors in neurons. Behavioral studies con-
A
Next, we used the puzzle box assay to investigate: (1) firmed that cotreatment with dexmedetomidine attenuates the
whether a single dose of etomidate caused deficits in prob- postanesthetic deficits in memory and problem-solving (fig. 5).
lem-solving and, if so, (2) whether dexmedetomidine pre- Therefore, administration of dexmedetomidine is a plausible
vented such deficits. The mouse was placed in a well lit pharmacologic strategy to reduce excessive cell-surface expres-
environment that offered access to the preferred, darkened sion of α5 GABA receptors in neurons after general anesthesia.
A
“goal” box. Admission to the goal box was made progres- Several converging lines of evidence indicate that α2 adren-
sively more difficult over a series of trials that spanned over ergic receptors in astrocytes, but not those in neurons, mediate
3 days (fig. 4D). the effects of dexmedetomidine. First, α2 adrenergic receptors
Performance of simpler tasks, including the underpass and are abundantly expressed in cortical astrocytes.38 Second, our
burrowing tasks, did not differ between treatment groups current studies of cultured astrocytes and neurons show that
(fig. 4E). Etomidate caused a deficit for the more difficult dexmedetomidine treatment of isolated astrocytes is both nec-
plug task, which was performed on day 3 as evidenced by essary and sufficient to prevent the etomidate-induced increase
an increase in the latency to complete the task (control: in tonic current in neurons. Finally, the α2 adrenergic recep-
76.4 ± 65.5 s, 95% CI 47.4 to 105.4, n = 22; etomidate: tor agonist clonidine mimics the effects of dexmedetomidine,
131.4 ± 93.8 s, 95% CI 89.8 to 173.0, n = 22; P = 0.08; but whereas the antagonist yohimbine abolishes these effects.
P = 0.016 for log-rank pairwise comparison). This deficit was Our results show that dexmedetomidine activation of α2
prevented in mice cotreated with dexmedetomidine because adrenergic receptors in astrocytes increases the level of phos-
the latency was significantly reduced to 69.1 ± 86.6 s (95% CI phorylated extracellular signal–regulated kinase 1/2. These
30.7 to 107.5, n = 22). Etomidate also prolonged the latency kinases can translocate from the cytosol to the nucleus where
to complete the second burrow task on day 2, which was they activate transcription factors that promote gene expres-
performed 2 min after the first burrow task (fig. 4F). These sion.39,40 Such changes could lead to an increase in brain-
results suggest that etomidate impaired problem-solving at derived neurotrophic factor mRNA levels and subsequent
least in part by reducing short-term memory and that cotreat- release of brain-derived neurotrophic factor. These findings
ment with dexmedetomidine prevented this impairment. are also supported by previous studies showing an increase in
Fig. 5. Dexmedetomidine reduces the excessive function of extrasynaptic α5 γ-aminobutyric acid type A (GABA ) receptors in
A
neurons after general anesthesia and thereby prevents delirium. Dexmedetomidine activates α2 adrenergic receptors expressed
in astrocytes and increases the level of phosphorylated extracellular signal–regulated kinase (p-ERK). These events stimulate the
release of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), which acts as a paracrine factor to stimulate tropomyosin receptor kinase B
(TrkB) receptors expressed in neurons. Activation of TrkB receptors reduces cell-surface expression of extrasynaptic α5 GABA
A
receptors in neurons and thereby prevents deficits in memory and problem-solving after general anesthesia.
Anesthesiology 2018; 129:477-89 486 Wang et al.
Copyright © 2018, the American Society of Anesthesiologists, Inc. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
PERIoPERATIvE MEDICINE
brain-derived neurotrophic factor in association with dexme- In summary, this study supports a model in which dex-
detomidine.35,41 Furthermore, exogenous brain-derived neuro- medetomidine prevents postanesthetic cognitive deficits by
trophic factor mimics the effects of dexmedetomidine in that reducing cell-surface expression and function of α5 GABA
A
it reduces the etomidate-induced increase in tonic current in receptors in neurons through the release of brain-derived
neurons. In contrast, inhibition of TrkB receptors blocks the neurotrophic factor from astrocytes. The implications of
effects of dexmedetomidine. Collectively, these data support these results extend well beyond the perioperative context,
a model in which dexmedetomidine stimulates the release of given that increased α5 GABA receptor function has been
A
brain-derived neurotrophic factor from astrocytes, and the associated with several neurologic disorders including stroke,
brain-derived neurotrophic factor acts on hippocampal neu- Alzheimer disease, depression, and inflammation-induced
rons to prevent a persistent increase in tonic current (fig. 5). brain injury.16,47–49 Dexmedetomidine and related drugs
The results of this study are important for several reasons. that target similar signaling pathway may help to prevent
First, dexmedetomidine alone did not cause the loss of the and treat these disorders.
righting reflex, but it did prolong the duration of etomidate-
induced anesthesia by 32%. Despite prolonging the hypnotic Research Support
properties of etomidate, dexmedetomidine had cognition- Supported by foundation grant No. FDN-154312 from
restoring effects in mice. Second, the data provide a plausible the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, Ottawa, On-
model to account for the cognition-sparing properties of tario, Canada (to Dr. Orser); by a Kirk Weber Award in
dexmedetomidine. The results identify both α2 adrenergic Anesthesia from Sunnybrook Health Sciences Center, To-
ronto, Ontario, Canada (to Ms. Kaneshwaran); by funds
receptors in astrocytes and α5 GABA receptors in neurons
A from the Department of Anesthesia at the University of
as potential therapeutic targets for treatments of postopera- Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, and from the Canadian
tive delirium. Dexmedetomidine has limited clinical utility Anesthesia Research Foundation, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
because of potential adverse cardiorespiratory effects and (to Dr. Avramescu); by Canadian Institutes of Health Re-
search, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, operating grant Nos.
should only be administered by a skilled care provider in a
119298 (to Dr. Ramsey) and 123448 (to Dr. Sivak); and by a
highly monitored environment. Other α2 adrenergic recep-
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council, Ottawa,
tor agonists may mimic the ability of dexmedetomidine to Ontario, Canada, Discovery grant No. RGPIN-2016-05538
prevent postanesthetic cognitive deficits. For example, cloni- and funds from the Canada Research Chair in Sensory Plas-
dine can be administered orally for sedation42 and may serve ticity and Reconsolidation and the University of Toronto
Center for the Study of Pain, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
as an alternative in some patients. In addition, new drugs
(to Dr. Bonin). The work was also supported by the Peri-
that target the expression and/or function of extrasynaptic
operative Brain Health Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
α5 GABA receptors may offer additional prevention and (http://www.perioperativebrainhealth.com).
A
treatment options. Finally, exogenous brain-derived neuro-
trophic factor prevents excessive GABA receptor function Competing Interests
A
and may be useful for patients who fail to tolerate α2 adren-
The authors declare no competing interests.
ergic receptor agonists.6 Interestingly, treatment with brain-
derived neurotrophic factor was shown to be safe in a study
Correspondence
of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.43
Address correspondence to Dr. Orser: Department of Physi-
Our study has several limitations. First, dexmedetomidine
ology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8,
could trigger the release of additional paracrine factors that
Canada. beverley.orser@utoronto.ca. Information on purchas-
have not been identified yet regulate extrasynaptic GABA ing reprints may be found at www.anesthesiology.org or on
A
receptor activity. Second, we did not compare the effects of the masthead page at the beginning of this issue. ANESTHESI-
dexmedetomidine on pro–brain-derived neurotrophic fac- OLOGY’s articles are made freely accessible to all readers, for
personal use only, 6 months from the cover date of the issue.
tor versus brain-derived neurotrophic factor levels. Astrocytes
release pro–brain-derived neurotrophic factor, a 32-kDa pre-
References
cursor protein that often has effects opposite to those of brain-
derived neurotrophic factor.44 For example, pro–brain-derived 1. Oh ES, Fong TG, Hshieh TT, Inouye SK: Delirium in older
persons: Advances in diagnosis and treatment. JAMA 2017;
neurotrophic factor promotes cell death through activation of
318:1161–74
a low-affinity nerve growth factor receptor (p75),45 whereas 2. Saczynski JS, Marcantonio ER, Quach L, Fong TG, Gross A,
the 14-kDa protein brain-derived neurotrophic factor, pro- Inouye SK, Jones RN: Cognitive trajectories after postopera-
motes cell survival via activation of TrkB receptors.46 The tive delirium. N Engl J Med 2012; 367:30–9
3. Abelha FJ, Luís C, Veiga D, Parente D, Fernandes V, Santos P,
equilibrium between pro–brain-derived neurotrophic factor
Botelho M, Santos A, Santos C: Outcome and quality of life
and brain-derived neurotrophic factor may be a determinant in patients with postoperative delirium during an ICU stay
in the protective effects of dexmedetomidine. In addition, the following major surgery. Crit Care 2013; 17:R257
effects of other commonly used anesthetic drugs, such as pro- 4. Weiser TG, Haynes AB, Molina G, Lipsitz SR, Esquivel MM,
Uribe-Leitz T, Fu R, Azad T, Chao TE, Berry WR, Gawande AA:
pofol or sedative benzodiazepines, were not studied but are of
Size and distribution of the global volume of surgery in 2012.
interest for future studies. Bull World Health Organ 2016; 94:201–209F
Anesthesiology 2018; 129:477-89 487 Wang et al.
Copyright © 2018, the American Society of Anesthesiologists, Inc. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Dexmedetomidine, Receptor Cell-surface Expression
5. Zurek AA, Yu J, Wang DS, Haffey SC, Bridgwater EM, Penna 23. Kaech S, Banker G: Culturing hippocampal neurons. Nat
A, Lecker I, Lei G, Chang T, Salter EW, Orser BA: Sustained Protoc 2006; 1:2406–15
increase in α5 GABA A receptor function impairs memory 24. Swanwick CC, Murthy NR, Mtchedlishvili Z, Sieghart W,
after anesthesia. J Clin Invest 2014; 124:5437–41 Kapur J: Development of GABAergic synapses in cultured
6. Kamibayashi T, Maze M: Clinical uses of α2-adrenergic ago- hippocampal neurons. J Comp Neurol 2006; 495:497–510
nists. ANESTHESIOLOGY 2000; 93:1345–9 25. Bright DP, Smart TG: Methods for recording and measur-
7. Djaiani G, Silverton N, Fedorko L, Carroll J, Styra R, Rao V, ing tonic GABA receptor-mediated inhibition. Front Neural
A
Katznelson R: Dexmedetomidine versus propofol sedation Circuits 2013; 7:193
reduces delirium after cardiac surgery: A randomized con- 26. Manyam NV, Katz L, Hare TA, Gerber JC 3rd, Grossman MH:
trolled trial. ANESTHESIOLOGY 2016; 124:362–8 Levels of γ-aminobutyric acid in cerebrospinal fluid in vari-
8. Su X, Meng ZT, Wu XH, Cui F, Li HL, Wang DX, Zhu X, Zhu ous neurologic disorders. Arch Neurol 1980; 37:352–5
SN, Maze M, Ma D: Dexmedetomidine for prevention of 27. Rye DB, Bliwise DL, Parker K, Trotti LM, Saini P, Fairley
delirium in elderly patients after non-cardiac surgery: A ran- J, Freeman A, Garcia PS, Owens MJ, Ritchie JC, Jenkins A:
domised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 2016; Modulation of vigilance in the primary hypersomnias by
388:1893–902 endogenous enhancement of GABA receptors. Sci Transl
A
9. Brummel NE, Girard TD: Preventing delirium in the intensive Med 2012; 4:161ra151
care unit. Crit Care Clin 2013; 29:51–65 28. Glykys J, Mody I: Activation of GABA receptors: Views from
A
10. Sanders RD, Xu J, Shu Y, Januszewski A, Halder S, Fidalgo A, outside the synaptic cleft. Neuron 2007; 56:763–70
Sun P, Hossain M, Ma D, Maze M: Dexmedetomidine attenu- 29. Caraiscos VB, Elliott EM, You-Ten KE, Cheng VY, Belelli D,
ates isoflurane-induced neurocognitive impairment in neo- Newell JG, Jackson MF, Lambert JJ, Rosahl TW, Wafford KA,
natal rats. ANESTHESIOLOGY 2009; 110:1077–85 MacDonald JF, Orser BA: Tonic inhibition in mouse hippo-
11. Qian XL, Zhang W, Liu MZ, Zhou YB, Zhang JM, Han L, Peng campal CA1 pyramidal neurons is mediated by α5 subunit-
YM, Jiang JH, Wang QD: Dexmedetomidine improves early containing γ-aminobutyric acid type A receptors. Proc Natl
postoperative cognitive dysfunction in aged mice. Eur J Acad Sci U S A 2004; 101:3662–7
Pharmacol 2015; 746:206–12 30. Ben Abdallah NM, Fuss J, Trusel M, Galsworthy MJ, Bobsin K,
12. Wang Y, Wu C, Han B, Xu F, Mao M, Guo X, Wang J: Colacicco G, Deacon RM, Riva MA, Kellendonk C, Sprengel
Dexmedetomidine attenuates repeated propofol exposure- R, Lipp HP, Gass P: The puzzle box as a simple and efficient
induced hippocampal apoptosis, PI3K/Akt/Gsk-3β signaling behavioral test for exploring impairments of general cogni-
disruption, and juvenile cognitive deficits in neonatal rats. tion and executive functions in mouse models of schizophre-
Mol Med Rep 2016; 14:769–75 nia. Exp Neurol 2011; 227:42–52
13. Si Y, Zhang Y, Han L, Chen L, Xu Y, Sun F, Ji M, Yang J, Bao 31. Chitilian HV, Eckenhoff RG, Raines DE: Anesthetic drug
H: Dexmedetomidine acts via the JAK2/STAT3 pathway to development: Novel drugs and new approaches. Surg Neurol
attenuate isoflurane-induced neurocognitive deficits in senile Int 2013; 4:S2–10
mice. PLoS One 2016; 11:e0164763 32. Forman SA: Clinical and molecular pharmacology of etomi-
14. Maguire JL, Stell BM, Rafizadeh M, Mody I: Ovarian cycle- date. ANESTHESIOLOGY 2011; 114:695–707
linked changes in GABA receptors mediating tonic inhibi- 33. Zhang Y, Sloan SA, Clarke LE, Caneda C, Plaza CA, Blumenthal
A
tion alter seizure susceptibility and anxiety. Nat Neurosci PD, Vogel H, Steinberg GK, Edwards MS, Li G, Duncan JA
2005; 8:797–804 3rd, Cheshier SH, Shuer LM, Chang EF, Grant GA, Gephart
15. MacDonald JF, Mody I, Salter MW: Regulation of N-methyl- MG, Barres BA: Purification and characterization of progeni-
D-aspartate receptors revealed by intracellular dialysis of tor and mature human astrocytes reveals transcriptional and
murine neurones in culture. J Physiol 1989; 414:17–34 functional differences with mouse. Neuron 2016; 89:37–53
16. Wang DS, Zurek AA, Lecker I, Yu J, Abramian AM, Avramescu 34. Peng L, Yu AC, Fung KY, Prévot V, Hertz L: α-Adrenergic stim-
S, Davies PA, Moss SJ, Lu WY, Orser BA: Memory deficits ulation of ERK phosphorylation in astrocytes is α-specific
2
induced by inflammation are regulated by α5-subunit- and may be mediated by transactivation. Brain Res 2003;
containing GABA receptors. Cell Rep 2012; 2:488–96 978:65–71
A
17. Albuquerque C, Joseph DJ, Choudhury P, MacDermott AB: 35. Degos V, Charpentier TL, Chhor V, Brissaud O, Lebon S,
Dissection, plating, and maintenance of cortical astrocyte Schwendimann L, Bednareck N, Passemard S, Mantz J,
cultures. Cold Spring Harb Protoc 2009; 2009:prot5275 Gressens P: Neuroprotective effects of dexmedetomidine
against glutamate agonist-induced neuronal cell death are
18. Qiao J, Wang J, Wang H, Zhang Y, Zhu S, Adilijiang A, Guo H,
related to increased astrocyte brain-derived neurotrophic
Zhang R, Guo W, Luo G, Qiu Y, Xu H, Kong J, Huang Q, Li
XM: Regulation of astrocyte pathology by fluoxetine prevents
factor expression. ANESTHESIOLOGY 2013; 118:1123–32
the deterioration of Alzheimer phenotypes in an APP/PS1 36. Gottmann K, Mittmann T, Lessmann V: BDNF signaling in
mouse model. Glia 2016; 64:240–54 the formation, maturation and plasticity of glutamatergic and
GABAergic synapses. Exp Brain Res 2009; 199:203–34
19. Wang J, Zhu S, Wang H, He J, Zhang Y, Adilijiang A, Zhang
H, Hartle K, Guo H, Kong J, Huang Q, Li XM: Astrocyte- 37. Carollo DS, Nossaman BD, Ramadhyani U: Dexmedetomidine:
dependent protective effect of quetiapine on GABAergic A review of clinical applications. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol
neuron is associated with the prevention of anxiety- 2008; 21:457–61
like behaviors in aging mice after long-term treatment. J 38. Hertz L, Lovatt D, Goldman SA, Nedergaard M: Adrenoceptors
Neurochem 2014; 130:780–9 in brain: Cellular gene expression and effects on astrocytic
20. Rogers RS, Dharsee M, Ackloo S, Sivak JM, Flanagan JG: metabolism and [Ca ]. Neurochem Int 2010; 57:411–20
2+i
Proteomics analyses of human optic nerve head astrocytes 39. Roskoski R Jr: ERK1/2 MAP kinases: Structure, function, and
following biomechanical strain. Mol Cell Proteomics 2012; regulation. Pharmacol Res 2012; 66:105–43
11:M111.012302 40. Wang JQ, Tang Q, Parelkar NK, Liu Z, Samdani S, Choe ES,
21. Guo X, Dason ES, Zanon-Moreno V, Jiang Q, Nahirnyj A, Yang L, Mao L: Glutamate signaling to Ras-MAPK in stria-
Chan D, Flanagan JG, Sivak JM: PGC-1α signaling coordi- tal neurons: Mechanisms for inducible gene expression and
nates susceptibility to metabolic and oxidative injury in the plasticity. Mol Neurobiol 2004; 29:1–14
inner retina. Am J Pathol 2014; 184:1017–29 41. Hwang L, Choi IY, Kim SE, Ko IG, Shin MS, Kim CJ, Kim
22. Banker GA, Cowan WM: Rat hippocampal neurons in dis- SH, Jin JJ, Chung JY, Yi JW: Dexmedetomidine ameliorates
persed cell culture. Brain Res 1977; 126:397–42 intracerebral hemorrhage-induced memory impairment by
Anesthesiology 2018; 129:477-89 488 Wang et al.
Copyright © 2018, the American Society of Anesthesiologists, Inc. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
PERIoPERATIvE MEDICINE
inhibiting apoptosis and enhancing brain-derived neuro- 45. Mowla SJ, Farhadi HF, Pareek S, Atwal JK, Morris SJ, Seidah
trophic factor expression in the rat hippocampus. Int J Mol NG, Murphy RA: Biosynthesis and post-translational process-
Med 2013; 31:1047–56 ing of the precursor to brain-derived neurotrophic factor. J
42. Laurito CE, Baughman VL, Becker GL, DeSilva TW, Carranza Biol Chem 2001; 276:12660–6
CJ: The effectiveness of oral clonidine as a sedative/anxio- 46. Binder DK, Scharfman HE: Brain-derived neurotrophic fac-
lytic and as a drug to blunt the hemodynamic responses to tor. Growth Factors 2004; 22:123–31
laryngoscopy. J Clin Anesth 1991; 3:186–93 47. Fischell J, Van Dyke AM, Kvarta MD, LeGates TA,
43. Ochs G, Penn RD, York M, Giess R, Beck M, Tonn J, Haigh J, Thompson SM: Rapid antidepressant action and restora-
Malta E, Traub M, Sendtner M, Toyka KV: A phase I/II trial of tion of excitatory synaptic strength after chronic stress by
recombinant methionyl human brain derived neurotrophic negative modulators of α5-containing GABA receptors.
A
factor administered by intrathecal infusion to patients with Neuropsychopharmacology 2015; 40:2499–509
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Other 48. Wu Z, Guo Z, Gearing M, Chen G: Tonic inhibition in den-
Motor Neuron Disord 2000; 1:201–6 tate gyrus impairs long-term potentiation and memory in an
44. Bergami M, Santi S, Formaggio E, Cagnoli C, Verderio C, Alzheimer’s disease model. Nat Commun 2014; 5:4159
Blum R, Berninger B, Matteoli M, Canossa M: Uptake and 49. Clarkson AN, Huang BS, Macisaac SE, Mody I, Carmichael ST:
recycling of pro-BDNF for transmitter-induced secretion by Reducing excessive GABA-mediated tonic inhibition promotes
cortical astrocytes. J Cell Biol 2008; 183:213–21 functional recovery after stroke. Nature 2010; 468:305–9
ANESTHESIoLoGY REFLECTIoNS FRoM THE WooD LIBRARY-MUSEUM
J. K. P. Pine Collars New York’s Upstate Market on Nitrous Oxide
Cylinders
From the Wood Library-Museum’s Ben Z. Swanson Collection, this notice (above) was extracted from a broadside pub-
lished by James Knox Polk Pine (1841 to 1919; banker, philanthropist, and collar manufacturer) of Troy, New York. An
astonishing commercial success at both patenting and producing shirt collars, J. K. P. Pine started a side business of
selling 100-gallon cylinders of nitrous oxide for $16 or refilling them for $6. Situated about 150 miles north of Manhattan
on New York’s eastern border with Vermont and Massachusetts, J. K. P. Pine’s Troy could “save the [two-day] delay
of sending your Cylinder to New York to be re-filled.” (Copyright © the American Society of Anesthesiologists’ Wood
Library-Museum of Anesthesiology.)
George S. Bause, M.D., M.P.H., Honorary Curator and Laureate of the History of Anesthesia, Wood Library-Museum
of Anesthesiology, Schaumburg, Illinois, and Clinical Associate Professor, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland,
Ohio. UJYC@aol.com.
Anesthesiology 2018; 129:477-89 489 Wang et al.
Copyright © 2018, the American Society of Anesthesiologists, Inc. Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.